{{Disambig-more|A Long-expected Party|[[A Long-expected Party (disambiguation)]]}}{{scene
|name=A Long-expected Party
|film=[[The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring]]
| image = The Lord of the Rings - The Fellowship of the Ring - Farewell party.jpg
|number=4 (theatrical edition)<br />
        5 (extended edition)
|duration=4:24 (theatrical edition)<br>
          5:34 (extended edition)
|characters=[[Gandalf]], [[Bilbo Baggins|Bilbo]], [[Frodo]], [[Merry]], [[Pippin]], [[Sam]]
|event=Bilbo gives his [[Farewell Party]] where he vanishes suddenly.
|previous=[[Very Old Friends]]
|next=[[Farewell Dear Bilbo]]
}}
'''A Long-expected Party''' is the fourth scene of ''[[The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring]]'' and the fifth scene of [[The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring (extended edition)|''The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring'' (extended edition)]]. This scene was extended in the latter edition.

==Synopsis==
The party begins. The hobbits are shown having fun with the elaborate festivities that Bilbo has arranged. The most elaborate is a grand display of a firework shaped like a dragon by [[Gandalf]] which is accidentally triggered by [[Merry]] and [[Pippin]]. Eventually, Bilbo gathers the attendees together, wishing to make an announcement. He tells the hobbits that 111 years is far too short a time to be among them, but that it is time for him to leave. He then disappears suddenly to the crowd's astonishment. 

In the extended edition, a conversation between Bilbo and [[Frodo]] is added which shows the last time they see each other before Bilbo vanishes. [[Samwise Gamgee]] also appears. Frodo encourages him to ask [[Rosie Cotton]] for a dance.

==Differences==
This is largely the first scene which parallels events from the books, as the previous scenes were largely meant to serve as an introduction to the world and characters. The scene is a largely accurate abridgement of the first few pages of "[[A Long-expected Party]]". The main difference is the introduction of Merry and Pippin, who are introduced after the party in the book.
{{title}}
[[Category:The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring scenes|05]]