{{short_description|1st chapter of the first book of The Fellowship of the Ring}}
{{Disambig-more|A Long-expected Party|[[A Long-expected Party (disambiguation)]]}}{{chapter
| image=Inger Edelfeldt - A Long Expected Party.jpg
| title=A Long-expected Party
| book=The Fellowship of the Ring
| number=1
| event=[[Bilbo Baggins]] throws his 111st birthday party; [[Gandalf]] arrives in Hobbiton; [[Frodo Baggins]] inherits the [[One Ring]].
| date=[[22 September]] {{TA|3001|n}}
| location=[[The Shire]]
| previous=Prologue Concerning Hobbits, and other matters
| next=The Shadow of the Past
}}

{{quote|I feel all thin, sort of stretched like butter that has been scraped over too much bread.|[[Bilbo Baggins]]}}

'''A Long-expected Party''' is the first chapter in ''[[The Fellowship of the Ring]],'' and thus in the entire ''[[The Lord of the Rings]]''. The chapter's title refers to and contrasts with the first chapter of ''[[The Hobbit]]'': [[An Unexpected Party]]. Key characters involved are [[Bilbo Baggins]], [[Gandalf]] and [[Frodo Baggins]].

The chapter tells of the [[Bilbo's Farewell Party|Birthday Party]] of Bilbo and his departure from [[Hobbiton]]. Central to the chapter is Gandalf's deepening relationship with Frodo, as well as the [[Wizards|Wizard]]'s growing suspicion of Bilbo's [[The One Ring|magic ring]]. It sets the stage for the epic journey that follows, ending with Gandalf leaving Frodo in possession of Bilbo's ring.

==Overview==
===Bilbo’s Announcement===
As Bilbo prepared to celebrate his eleventy-first birthday, he announced a grand birthday party of special magnificence, which caused much talk and excitement in [[Hobbiton]]. The announcement was followed by a brief recounting of Bilbo's peculiar history and character. Frodo, Bilbo’s cousin and heir who lives with him at [[Bag End]] and affectionately calls him "uncle", is introduced. Coincidentally, Frodo shares the same birthday as Bilbo and is about to turn thirty-three.

===A Defense of Bilbo===
At the [[Ivy Bush]], [[Hamfast Gamgee]] had a conversation with [[Old Noakes]] of [[Bywater]], [[Daddy Twofoot]], and a few other interested [[Hobbits]]. He commented on how gentlemanly a fellow Bilbo was. Though he agreed with his audience about the queerness of the [[Brandybuck Family|Brandybucks]] (Frodo's relatives on his [[Primula Brandybuck|mother]]'s side), he lauded Bilbo for taking Frodo away from them to live among "decent folk". The Gaffer recounted the story of the drowning of Frodo's parent's, [[Drogo Baggins]] and [[Primula Brandybuck]], and rebuffed the dislikable [[Sandyman]] for suggesting that it was more than an accident.

When a stranger brought up the old legend about Bag End being stuffed with gold, silver, and "jools" since Bilbo's [[Quest of Erebor|disappearance and return]], The Gaffer openly doubted the legend, recalling that he saw Bilbo return with only a few big bags and chests. During his narrative he mentioned his son, [[Samwise Gamgee]], who had been inclined to believe Bilbo's fantastic tales.

{{quote|Elves and Dragons!'' I says to him. ''[[Cabbage]]s and potatoes are better for me and you. Don't go getting mixed up in the business of your betters, or you'll land in trouble too big for you,'' I says to him. And I might say it to others.''|[[Hamfast Gamgee]]}}

Despite his efforts, The Gaffer did not convince his audience. Sandyman reminded the listeners of how [[dwarves]] and Gandalf visited Bilbo from time to time, and concluded by stating that Bag End was simply "queer". The Gaffer brushed this aside with a retort, complimenting Bilbo's generosity.

{{quote|If that's being queer, then we could do with a bit more queerness in these parts.|[[Hamfast Gamgee]]}}

===The Birthday Party===
As the day of the party approached, Dwarves arrived at Bag End in a wagon laden with packages. They were followed by [[Gandalf]], who brought his famous fireworks. Gandalf dismissed a group of excited children with the promise that they would get to see plenty of fireworks during the party. Afterward, Bilbo and Gandalf sat in Bag End and discussed the upcoming event. Gandalf told Bilbo to stick to his plan and wondered aloud who would laugh at Bilbo's "joke".

The party was held on [[22 September]], {{TA|3001}}. A large pavilion had been erected over the [[Party Tree]], an ancient oak behind Bag End. There were presents, dancing, songs, games, music, three meals, and Gandalf's marvelous fireworks. To signal supper at the pavilion, Gandalf fired off a particularly large firework that exploded in the shape of a [[Dragons|dragon]], commemorating the defeat of the dragon, [[Smaug]].

===Bilbo’s Speech and Departure===
After the supper, Bilbo gave a [[Bilbo's birthday speech|speech]] to the guests. He started out with short, simple, and obvious statements (as is customary among Hobbits), but then became enigmatic:

{{quote|I don’t know half of you half as well as I should like; and I like less than half of you half as well as you deserve.|[[Bilbo Baggins]]}}

With his audience thoroughly confused, Bilbo added that Frodo was coming into his inheritance. He then insulted his listeners by calling them "one gross", explaining that he'd invited exactly 144 guests to match his and Frodo's combined total of years.

Finally, Bilbo declared that he was leaving. He slipped on his magic ring and became invisible as Gandalf triggered a bright flash. The Hobbits, alarmed and annoyed, finished the party and left.

Bilbo quickly returned to Bag End, where he was greeted by Gandalf. As he got himself ready to travel, he admitted to Gandalf that he felt stretched and old, and that he didn't believe he'd ever return to [[The Shire]]. Gandalf promised to look after Frodo, and then suggested that Bilbo leave the magic ring behind. Bilbo became defensive, then angry at Gandalf's insistence. At last, Bilbo trusted Gandalf's judgement and released the ring, before leaving with three Dwarves down the road while [[The Road Goes Ever On (song)|singing a song]].

===Frodo Inherits the Ring===
Frodo returned from the party too late to say goodbye to Bilbo. He spoke briefly with Gandalf, who assured him that Bilbo would be alright and told him that Bilbo had left him the ring. Gandalf warned Frodo, however, to keep it secret and safe.

===Bilbo's Will and Gifts===
The next day, Frodo let Hobbits into Bag End to collect presents left to them by Bilbo. Most presents were given out of kindness or where there was need, but often with a joke or point of sarcasm, such as in the case of relative [[Lobelia Sackville-Baggins]].

The afternoon became hectic, and at last Frodo put his friend, [[Meriadoc Brandybuck]], in charge while he rested. The Sackville-Bagginses found Frodo nevertheless, and scrutinized Bilbo's will in the hope of finding a larger inheritance for themselves. They found it flawless in every respect, and left in disgust.

===Gandalf’s Suspicion of Bilbo's Ring===
As the day ended, Frodo and Gandalf spoke once more. They discussed Bilbo's peculiarities regarding the ring; especially how he invented the false story of how he had acquired it. Gandalf left Frodo with another warning about the ring, the reasons for which he could not give, but stated that his suspicions were aroused. He bade Frodo farewell and departed, not to be seen in Hobbiton again for a long time after.

==Background==
{{quote|I have written the first chapter of a new story about Hobbits &ndash; 'A long expected party'. A merry Christmas.|J.R.R. Tolkien to C.A. Furth<ref>{{L|20}}</ref>}}
Tolkien started writing the opening chapter of ''[[The Lord of the Rings]]'' in December [[1937]], with the above quote being from a letter written on [[19 December]].

In the very first draft, consisting of five pages, [[Bilbo Baggins|Bilbo]], around 70 years of age, had depleted his treasure, and stages his party and disappearance because of his desire to travel again. In a second draft [[Gandalf]] is introduced.

In the following draft, Bilbo had already departed, and the party was organized by Bilbo and [[Primula Brandybuck]]'s son, "[[Bingo Baggins]]", who had inherited the Ring as a parting gift. In the next draft, he became his adopted cousin, now called Bingo [[Bolger]]-Baggins.<ref>{{CG|CG}}, p.xix</ref> With Bilbo having mysteriously disappeared, Bingo is afraid to go look for him, but keeps the Ring will lead it to him. Gandalf had advised Bingo to stage a disappearance and departure so that the Ring would guide him to a similar path and eventually to Bilbo, hence Bingo's farewell party. Bingo's friends, Odo, Frodo, and Marmaduke are introduced.<ref>{{RS|1Iv}}, pp. 41-42</ref>

{{references}}

[[Category:The Fellowship of the Ring chapters|Long-expected Party]]
[[fi:Odotettu juhla (TSH)]]