{{disambig-two|the [[Noldor|Noldo]] of the [[First Age]]|film character also called "Aegnor"|[[Figwit]]}}
{{infobox character
| people=[[Noldor|Noldo]]
| name=Aegnor
| image=Elena Kukanova - Aegnor 2.jpg
| caption="Aegnor" by [[Elena Kukanova]]
| pronun=[[Sindarin|S]], {{IPA|[ˈa͡ɛɡnor]}}
| othernames=''Ambaráto'' ([[Quenya|Q]], [[Father-name|fn]])<br/>''Aikanáro'' ([[Quenya|Q]], [[Amilessë|mn]])
| titles=
| position=Lord of [[Dorthonion]]
| location=[[Eldamar]]<br/>[[Dorthonion]]
| affiliation=
| language=[[Quenya]]<br/>[[Sindarin]]
| birth=Between {{YT|1300}} & {{YT|1362|n}}<ref group="note">{{MR|P2l}}, p. 106 lists 1300 as the birth of Finrod (then named "[[Inglor Felagund|Inglor]]") and 1362 as the birth of Galadriel.</ref>
| birthlocation=[[Eldamar]]
| rule={{FA|7}} - {{FA|455|n}}
| death={{FA|455}}
| deathlocation=In the [[Dagor Bragollach]]
| age=between c. 1,726 & c. 2,297<ref group="note">[[Years of the Sun]]. Each [[Years of the Trees|Year of the Trees]] is equal to 9.582 Years of the Sun, and the Years of the Trees ended in the [[Year of the Trees 1500|year 1500]].</ref>
| notablefor=
| house=[[House of Finarfin]]
| parentage=[[Finarfin]] & [[Eärwen]]
| siblings=[[Finrod]]<br/>[[Angrod]]<br/>[[Galadriel]]
| spouse=Never married (loved [[Andreth]])
| children=None
| gender=Male
| height=Tall
| hair=Golden
| eyes=
| clothing=
| weapons=
| steed=
}}
{{quote|He is a warrior, Andreth, and a spirit of wrath. In every stroke that he deals he sees the Enemy who long ago did thee [[Fall of Men|this hurt]].|[[Finrod]] about Aegnor in ''[[Athrabeth Finrod ah Andreth]]''}}

'''Aegnor''' was a son of [[Finarfin]] and a lord of the [[Noldor]]. He was terrible to endure in battle and a fire burned in his eyes. His golden hair was stiff and straight. Aegnor's spirit burned relentless, even at a young age, but he was also thought of as generous and noble among the [[Firstborn]].<ref name="Aikanaro" />

==History==
===Early history===
Aegnor was the elder brother of [[Galadriel]] and the younger brother of [[Finrod|Finrod Felagund]] and [[Angrod]].<ref>{{S|Feanor}}</ref> He had a strong friendship with [[Fingon]] and grace to him, and he followed the Exiles under the host of [[Fingolfin]].<ref>{{S|Flight}}</ref> 

As vassals of Finrod, he and Angrod held the highlands of [[Dorthonion]] against [[Morgoth]] during the [[Siege of Angband]].<ref>{{S|Beleriand}}</ref> But, like Finrod, he had no trust that the Siege would hold Morgoth for long.<ref name="Athrabeth">{{MR|P4c}}</ref>{{rp|434}}

In the time following the alliance of the [[Edain]] with the Elves, who had themselves become numerous and strong, [[Fingolfin]] pondered an assault upon Angband. Aegnor and Angrod, dwelling in regions where [[Thangorodrim]] could be descried, were alone among the chieftains of the Noldor who were of like mind; with most of the other Noldor being content with things as they were, trusting them to last, and slow to begin an assault in which many must surely perish. Thus, the designs of Fingolfin came to naught.<ref name="fingolfin">{{S|Fingolfin}}</ref>

===Love with Andreth===
While in Dorthonion, Aegnor fell in love with the [[Man|human]] woman, [[Andreth]], but from this he turned away. 

The Elves considered it a grievous thing if a wedded pair were sundered during the bearing of a child, or while the first years of childhood lasted, and therefore they customarily avoid wedding or begetting children during times of war. The Eldar also recognized that any marriage between Elves and Men, being brief and hard, with the least cruel fate being that death would soon end it, shall only be for some high purpose of Doom.

While Aegnor's heart wished to take Andreth and flee far away, this would have forsaken his kin, to which love and loyalty held him to. Were they wed, then, as she grew old, he would have stayed at her side to uphold her, and she would have thus had in every hour pity inescapable, and he would not have her so shamed.

As the life and love of the Eldar dwelled much in memory, they would rather have a memory that is fair but unfinished than one that goes on to a grievous end. As such, Aegnor would ever remember her in the sun of morning, and that last evening by the water of [[Aeluin]] in which he saw her face mirrored with a star caught in her hair.

For her sake he would never take the hand of any bride from his own kindred, but live alone to the end; and even after death, forever remain in the [[Halls of Waiting]] until the end of Arda.<ref name="Athrabeth">{{MR|P4c}}</ref>

===Death===
Aegnor and Angrod were both slain in the [[Dagor Bragollach]].<ref name="fingolfin" />

==Etymology==
''Aegnor'' was the [[Sindarin]] version of ''Aikanáro'', although it was not true Sindarin, as there was no equivalent to ''aica'', which would take the form ''aeg''.<ref name="Aikanaro">{{PM|Finwe}}, p. 347</ref> However, both ''Aegnor'' and ''Aikanáro'' are glossed as "Sharp-flame" at some point,<ref name="Athrabeth" /> so ''Aegnor'' could easily be a combination of ''[[aeg]]'' ("sharp") + the suffixal form of ''[[naur]]'' ("fire").

==Other names==
The original name of Aegnor was '''''Aikanáro''''', his [[Quenya]] [[mother-name]], meaning "Fell Fire", from ''[[aika]]'' ("fell", "terrible", "dire") + ''[[Nár (Quenya)|nár]]'' ("fire") + ''-o'' (pronominal suffix). This was in part a prophetic name, as he was one of the most valiant warriors, with fire in his eyes.<ref name="Aikanaro" /> If directly translated into Sindarin, ''Aikanáro'' would have been rendered as ''Goenor'', using the noun ''goe'' ("terror, great fear").<ref>{{PM|XINotes}}, p. 363, note 45</ref>

His [[Quenya]] [[father-name]] was '''''Ambaráto'''''. It seems to mean "High Champion" and to be a compound of ''[[amba]]'' ("up") and ''[[aráto]]'' ("champion").<ref name="Eldamo">{{webcite|author=[[Paul Strack]]|articleurl=https://eldamo.org/content/words/word-2175363371.html|articlename=Q. ''Ambaráto'' m.|website=Eldamo|accessed=01 March 2024}}</ref> Its Sindarin version would have been ''[[Amrod]]'', but to distinguish himself from the other Noldo [[Angrod]] and because he preferred it, he used his mother-name.<ref name="Aikanaro" />

In '' Ælfwine’s translation of the Quenta into Old English; Old English equivalents of Elvish names'', he is called '''Eangrim'''.<ref>{{SM|QA1}}</ref> "Ean" is not uncommon as an element in Old English and Germanic names, but the etymology is unknown.<ref>[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Germanic_name Germanic names]</ref> "Grim" translates into meanings such as "fierce", "terrible", "cruel", "savage", "violent", "deadly", or "severe".<ref>''An Anglo-Saxon dictionary : based on the manuscript collections of the late Joseph Bosworth. Supplement'', pg. 486 (https://archive.org/details/anglosaxondictio00tolluoft/page/486/)</ref>

==Genealogy==
{{familytree/start}}
{{familytree| MIR |y|~|~|~|~|~|~| FIN |y| IND | | | | | | | | | | | | OLW | | | | | | | |MIR=[[Míriel]]<br /><small>''d. {{YT|1170}}''</small>|FIN=[[Finwë]]<br /><small>''d. {{YT|1495}}''</small>|IND=[[Indis]]<br /><small>''b. {{YT}}''</small>|OLW=[[Olwë]]<br /><small>''b. {{YT}}''</small>}}
{{familytree| | | |!| | | |,|-|-|-|v|-|^|-|v|-|-|-|.| | | | | | | |,|-|^|-|.| | | | | | |}}
{{familytree| | | FEA | | FDS | | FNG | | IRM | | FRF |~|~|y|~|~| EAW | | SON | | | | | |FEA=[[Fëanor]]<br /><small>''{{YT|1169}} - {{YT|1497|n}}''</small>|FDS=[[Findis]]<br /><small>''b. {{YT}}''</small>|FNG=[[Fingolfin]]<br /><small>''{{YT|1190}} - {{FA|456}}''</small>|IRM=[[Írimë]]<br /><small>''b. {{YT}}''</small>|FRF=[[Finarfin]]<br /><small>''b. {{YT|1230}}''</small>|EAW=[[Eärwen]]<br /><small>''b. {{YT}}''</small>|SON=''unknown sons''}}
{{familytree| | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |,|-|-|-|v|-|-|-|^|-|-|-|v|-|-|.| | | | | | | |}}
{{familytree| | | | | | | | | | | | | | | FRD | | ANG |y| ELD | | AEG | | GAL |y| CEL | |FRD=[[Finrod]]<br /><small>''{{YT|1300}} - {{FA|465}}''</small>|ANG=[[Angrod]]<br /><small>''d. {{FA|455}}''</small>|AEG='''AEGNOR'''<br /><small>''d. {{FA|455}}''</small>|GAL=[[Galadriel]]<br /><small>''b. {{YT|1362}}''</small>|ELD=[[Eldalótë]]<br /><small>''b. {{YT}}''</small>|CEL=[[Celeborn]]<br /><small>''b. {{FA}}''</small>}}
{{familytree| | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |!| | | | | | | | | | | |!| | | | |}}
{{familytree| | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | ORO | | | | | | ELR |y| CLB | | | |ORO=[[Orodreth]]<br /><small>''d. {{FA|495}}''</small>|CLB=[[Celebrían]]<br /><small>''b. {{SA}}''</small>|ELR=[[Elrond]]<br /><small>''b. {{FA|532}}''</small>}}
{{familytree| | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |,|-|^|-|.| | | |,|-|-|-|+|-|-|-|.| | |}}
{{familytree| | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | FIL | | GIL | | ELL | | ELO | | ARW | |GIL=[[Gil-galad]]<br /><small>''d. {{SA|3441}}''</small>|FIL=[[Finduilas]]<sup>[[Finduilas#Notes|NB]]</sup><br /><small>''{{FA|272}} - {{FA|495|n}}''</small>|ELL=[[Elladan]]<br /><small>''b. {{TA|130}}''</small>|ELO=[[Elrohir]]<br /><small>''b. {{TA|130}}''</small>|ARW=[[Arwen]]<br /><small>''{{TA|241}} - {{FoA|121}}''</small>}}
{{familytree/end}}

==Other versions of the legendarium==
In such early writings as ''[[The Lost Tales]]'' and ''[[The Lay of Leithian]]'', the precursor of Aegnor was called '''''[[Egnor (disambiguation)|Egnor]]''''', and he was one of the sons of Finrod (later Finarfin) who fell during the [[Siege of Angband]].<ref>{{LB|3}}, ''passim''</ref><ref>{{HM|SM}}, ''passim''</ref> The variation ''Eignor'' is also encountered in some texts.<ref>{{NM|P2x}}, p. 222</ref>

In ''[[The Later Annals of Valinor]]'', Angrod, Aegnor, and Orodreth had a great friendship with Celegorm and Curufin; so much so that when ''"Fëanor and his folk seized all the ships and sailed east across the sea, and they took none of the other companies save Orodreth,  Angrod, and Egnor (Aegnor), whom Celegorm and Curufin loved"''.<ref>{{LR|AV}}, p. 116</ref>

{{references|notes}}

{{seq-start}}
{{seq-head
|race=noldor
|house=[[House of Finarfin]]<small><br/>Cadet branch of the [[House of Finwë]]</small>
|born=Between {{YT|1300}} & {{YT|1362|n}}
|died={{FA|455}}
}}
{{seq
|pvac=None
|prev=Position established
|list=Lord of [[Dorthonion]]
|dates={{FA|7}} – {{FA|455|n}} (with [[Angrod]])
|next=[[Dagor Bragollach|Realm destroyed]]
|nvac=None
}}
{{seq-end}}

[[Category:Calaquendi]]
[[Category:Characters in The Silmarillion]]
[[Category:First Age characters]]
[[Category:House of Finarfin]]
[[Category:Noldor]]
[[Category:Rulers in Beleriand]]
[[Category:Sindarin names]]

[[de:Aegnor]]
[[fi:Aegnor]]
[[fr:encyclo/personnages/elfes/noldor/aegnor]]