{{location infobox
| name=Aelin-uial
| image=Peter Xavier Price - Finrod and Turgon at the Meres of Twilight.jpg
| caption="Finrod and Turgon at the Meres of Twilight" by [[Peter Xavier Price]]
| pronun={{respell|eye|lin|oo-i|al}}
| othernames=''Umboth Muilin'' ([[Sindarin|S]])<br />Meres of Twilight
| location=Meeting of [[Aros]] and [[Sirion]]
| type=Marshes
| description=Marshy mazes of creeks and lakes
| regions=
| towns=
| inhabitants=[[Iathrim]]
| created=
| destroyed=
| events=Dreams of [[Turgon]] and [[Finrod]]
}}
'''Aelin-uial''', or the '''Meres of Twilight''', was a region of pools and marshes where the river [[Aros]] flowed into [[Sirion]] in the south-west of [[Doriath]].

==Location==
The Aelin-uial was the maze of lakes and [[Fens of Sirion|fens]] formed where the river [[Aros]] met the [[Sirion]], before it fell beneath the [[Andram]].<ref name="Map">{{S|Map}}</ref> These were lands heavy with enchantment from the [[Girdle of Melian]] guarding [[Doriath]] to the north of the Aelin-uial, and also from the power of [[Ulmo]] the [[Valar|Vala]], which was very strong in this area.<ref>{{S|Beleriand}}</ref>

At the southernmost end of the Aelin-uial, the waters of Sirion met once more at the [[Falls of Sirion]].<ref name="Map" />
==History==
The Aelin-uial was under the control of Doriath. [[Thingol]]'s [[marchwardens]] kept [[hidden ferries]] among the reeds, which they could use to cross in between Sirion's eastern and western banks unseen by anyone.<ref>{{S|Turin}}</ref>

It was here that [[Turgon]] and [[Finrod]] slept and Ulmo put into their dreams the idea of building their hidden strongholds located at [[Gondolin]] and [[Nargothrond]].<ref>{{S|Return}}</ref> 

Near north of here, [[Morwen]] stopped in her travel to [[Nargothrond]], and [[Mablung]] and his men showed themselves to her, as they had been following her in secret by order of [[Thingol]]. She refused the offer of coming back to Doriath and accepted them as escort in her travel. Then Mablung lead her to the Pools and took the hidden rafts used by the messengers between Doriath and Nargothrond, and they crossed the Aelin-uial in the white mists of the night.<ref>{{CH|14}}</ref>

It was also in the meres that the Elves who guarded the western marches of Doriath found [[Húrin]], whom they then brought before King Thingol.<ref>{{S|Doriath}}</ref>

==Etymology==
''Aelin-uial'' is a [[Sindarin]] name, composed of ''aelin'' "meres", plural of ''[[ael]]'' + ''[[uial]]'' "twilight".

A variant name used by [[J.R.R. Tolkien|Tolkien]] was '''''Umboth Muilin''''' (also spelt ''Umboth-muilin'' and ''Umboth-Muilin''), which translates to "Pools of Twilight".<ref>{{HM|IX}}, pp. 451-2</ref> [[Helge Fauskanger]] has noted that the [[Noldorin]] name ''Oelinuial'' ("Pools of Twilight"; variant forms ''Elinuial'' and ''Eilinuial''<ref>[[David Salo]], "[https://tolkienlistsearch.herokuapp.com/message/5e9c35ba3ee6a6c41e986a69 AE and OE (message 2028)]" at [[Elfling]]</ref>), of the [[The Etymologies|''Etymologies'']], became ''Aelin-uial'' in the published [[The Silmarillion|''Silmarillion'']].<ref>[[Helge Fauskanger]], "[http://folk.uib.no/hnohf/index/indexs.htm Index to the Etymologies - Explanation]" at [http://folk.uib.no/hnohf/ Ardalambion] (accessed 18 September 2011)</ref>

Yet another, early form, was the [[Gnomish]] name ''Hithliniath'' ("Pools of Mist"; which was amended to ''Umboth Muilin'', itself amended to ''Aelinuial'').<ref>{{WJ|Beleriand}}, p. 194 (§111)</ref>

{{references}}
[[Category:Doriath]]
[[Category:Sindarin locations]]
[[Category:Swamps]]
[[de:Aelin-uial]]
[[fi:Aelin-uial]]
[[fr:encyclo/geographie/eaux/beleriand/aelin-uial]]