{{infobox character
| people=[[Edain|Adan]]
| name=Aerin
| image=Turner Mohan - Aerin.jpg
| caption="Aerin" by [[:Category:Images by Turner Mohan|Turner Mohan]]
| pronun=
| othernames=Lady Aerin, Indor’s daughter
| titles=
| position=
| location=[[Dor-lómin]]
| affiliation=
| language=
| birth=
| birthlocation=
| rule=
| death={{FA|496}} (suicide)
| deathlocation=Dor-lómin
| age=
| notablefor=
| house=[[House of Hador]]
| parentage=[[Indor]]
| siblings=
| spouse=[[Brodda]]
| children=
| gender=Female
| height=
| hair=
| eyes=
| clothing=
| weapons=
| steed=
}}

'''Aerin''', the daughter of [[Indor]],<ref>{{CH|12}}, p. 189</ref> was a [[House of Hador|kinswoman]] of [[Húrin]] in [[Dor-lómin]], taken as wife by [[Brodda|Brodda the Easterling]].

==History==
After the [[Nirnaeth Arnoediad]], [[Brodda]] the [[Easterlings|Easterling]] became the lord of [[Hithlum]], and took her as his wife against her will, hoping thus to produce an heir. Aerin secretly helped [[Húrin]]'s wife [[Morwen]].<ref>{{CH|4}}, p. 69</ref>

When [[Túrin]], son of Húrin, returned to [[Dor-lómin]], he learned from Aerin that his mother had left Hithlum.  In rage he killed Brodda, thereby also sealing Aerin's fate, who immolated herself alive in her [[Brodda's hall|hall]] to prevent further torment from other Easterlings. From then on, the remainder of the [[House of Hador]] were to be persecuted even more cruelly than before.<ref>{{S|Turin}}</ref><ref>{{CH|12}}</ref>

==Etymology==
As [[Paul Strack]] points out, due the context in later [[legendarium]], the name should be [[Mannish]] Hadorian, but because its development in [[J.R.R. Tolkien]]'s works, it could be [[Sindarin]].<ref>{{webcite|author=[[Paul Strack]]|articleurl=https://eldamo.org/content/words/word-797072021.html|articlename=Ed. ''Aerin'' f.|website=Eldamo|accessed=31 May 2024}}</ref> If that was the case it would include the element ''[[aer]]'' ("ocean"). The ending perhaps is the same in the names of ''Húrin'' and ''Túrin''; in that case the name would mean "She who desires the Sea".

==Genealogy==
{{familytree/start}}
{{familytree| | | | | IND | |IND=[[Indor]]<br /><small>''b. {{FA}}''</small>}}
{{familytree| | | | | |!| | |}}
{{familytree| BRO |~| AER | |BRO=[[Brodda]]<br /><small>''d. {{FA|496}}''</small>|AER='''AERIN'''<br /><small>''d. {{FA|496}}''</small>}}
{{familytree/end}}

==Other versions of the legendarium==
===The Book of Lost Tales===
This character already appears in the early version of the [[legendarium]] in ''[[The Book of Lost Tales]]'', with the [[Gnomish]] name '''''Airin'''''. She is described as "of the long hair", and she is also a kinswoman of [[Mavwin]] and wife of Brodda. Here he is not an Easterling, but it is said she had a horrible life by his side.<ref name="Turambar">{{LT2|II}}</ref>{{rp|91}}

When Mawvin decided to leave [[Hisilómë]] and go to [[Tinwelint]]'s realm, she asked Airin to put her daughter and properties under the care of Brodda. Airin conviced her husband of this without effort, but [[Nienóri]] refused to stay.<ref name="Turambar" />{{rp|93}}

She was not present when Turambar arrived at [[Brodda's hall]] and killed him. After the murder of Brodda and [[Orlin]], Airin appeared and stopped others from attacking Turambar. She was horrified by the crime, and Turambar did not dare to look upon her. Then she pronounced a public judgement, saying that Brodda was a bad lord and Turambar's wrath was just, but being a guest, killing his host was a terrible crime, as was killing Orlin of the same kind. Therefore she condemned Turambar to be disinherited and exiled for ever. Everyone there agreed with her, save Turambar, who asked to be killed right away. But the people there loved Airin and respected her, and Airin's secret wish to keep Túrin alive was fulfilled.<ref name="Turambar" />{{rp|89–91}}

She is given the Gnomish name '''''Faiglindra''''' ("long-tressed"); in [[Qenya]] '''''Firilanda'''''.<ref name="Turambar" />{{rp|93}}

{{references}}
[[Category:Characters in The Book of Lost Tales]]
[[Category:Characters in The Children of Húrin]]
[[Category:Characters in The Silmarillion]]
[[Category:First Age characters]]
[[Category:House of Hador]]
[[Category:Sindarin names]]

[[de:Aerin]]
[[fi:Aerin]]
[[fr:encyclo/personnages/hommes/1a/peuple de hador/aerin]]