{{race infobox
| name=Ainur
| image = Anna Kulisz - Ainulindale.jpg
| caption=Ainulindale by [[:Category:Images by Anna Kulisz|Anna Kulisz]]
| pronun={{IPA|[ˈaɪnur]}}
| othernames=''Ayanûz'' ([[Valarin|V]]), Holy Ones, Great Ones, 
| origin=[[Creation of the Ainur]]
| location=[[Timeless Halls]], [[Arda]], [[Almaren]], [[Aman]]
| affiliation=
| rivalry=
| language=[[Valarin]], [[Quenya]], [[Sindarin]], [[Khuzdul]], [[Black Speech]], [[Westron]], etc.
| people=[[Valar]], [[Maiar]]
| members=[[Melkor]], [[Manwë]], [[Ulmo]], [[Varda]], [[Aulë]], [[Yavanna]], [[Mandos]], [[Sauron]], [[Gothmog]], [[Gandalf]], [[Saruman]]
| lifespan=Immortal
| distinctions=
| height=
| hair=
| skin=
| clothing=[[Fana]]
| weapons=
}}
The '''Ainur''' (singular '''Ainu''') were divine [[spirits]], the "Holy Ones". They were the first beings created by [[Ilúvatar]], the "order" of the [[Valar]] and [[Maiar]], made before [[Eä]].<ref name="Ainu">{{S|Ainu}}</ref>

==History==
===Origins===
{{Main|Creation of the Ainur}}
The Ainur were the first, and mightiest, beings created by [[Ilúvatar]] before the beginning of the World. The Ainur were the "offspring of [[Ilúvatar]]'s thought", and each was given understanding only of that part of the mind of Ilúvatar from which they came. The exception to this was [[Melkor]], the greatest of the Ainur, who had a part of the gifts of all the others.

Although all Ainur are made of the thought of Ilúvatar, in His mind some were siblings. Thus for instance, [[Melkor]] and [[Manwë]] were considered brothers.

The Ainur were "kindled with the [[Flame Imperishable]]". Ilúvatar instructed them in music, until he brought them together to make the [[Music of the Ainur]]; the great song that created the [[Vision of Ilúvatar]] and ultimately the real World.<ref name="Ainu" />

===Within Eä===
Through the Music of the Ainur, Ilúvatar created a Vision of the World, and explained much of its nature and destiny to them – so the Ainur have much knowledge of the World, but are not omniscient. Then [[Ilúvatar]] granted the World true being. Many of the Ainur desired to descend into it and form it in readiness for the coming of the [[Children of Ilúvatar]] ([[Elves]] and [[Men]]).<ref name="Ainu" /> Fourteen of these great Ainur became the [[Valar]], or Powers of [[Arda]].<ref>{{S|IIb}}</ref> The fifteenth, Melkor, turned aside from that path and became known as [[Morgoth]], the Dark Enemy.<ref>{{S|IId}}</ref> The many lesser Ainur that accompanied the Valar into [[Arda]] are known as [[Maiar]].<ref>{{S|IIc}}</ref>

Those Ainur who entered the World at its beginning remain bound to it until its end.<ref name="Ainu" /> Though Melkor was eventually thrown into the [[Void]] by the others, he is prophesied to return before [[the End]].<ref name="Istari">{{UT|Istari}}</ref> Little is known of the ultimate future of the Ainur, even by themselves, but it is said that, after the death of the World, they will make a [[Second Music of the Ainur|Second Music]], even greater, with the race of [[Men]].<ref>{{S|1}}</ref>

==Characteristics==
The Ainur are [[immortal]], angelic beings. Nonetheless they do possess gender. Those who later descended to Arda took on common male and female forms to appear to the Elves in, and have an inherent male or female gender even when formless. This is because their gender is based on their being, which is independent of any physical form they may assume.<ref name="Ainu" /> But unlike the [[Children of Ilúvatar]], they do not actually need [[hröa]]r. Nevertheless, they can take tangible physical form called '''''[[fana]]''''', but this is a manifestation of their spirit and they do not technically have bodies the way [[Elves]] and [[Men]] do. As such, an Ainu cannot quite be killed. However, Ainur's spirits can be weakened, in ways that hinder their ability to take shapes, influence the world, or even affect the world at all.<ref>{{L|200}}</ref>

For example, [[Sauron]]'s spirit was repeatedly weakened by successive damage when he was defeated by [[Huan]] in the form of a [[Werewolf]];<ref>{{S|Beren}}</ref> in the [[Downfall of Númenor]] which destroyed his ability to take fair form;<ref>{{S|Akallabeth}}</ref> his defeat in the [[War of the Last Alliance]] when he lost the ability to take a physical form,<ref>{{S|Rings}}</ref> and had to regain his power in the [[East]] for about 1000 years;<ref>{{App|TA}}</ref> and finally with the destruction of [[the One Ring]] which broke his ability to affect the world at all, reducing his spirit to a state that could no longer do harm.<ref>{{RK|VI4}}</ref>  None of these things killed Sauron outright. A similar fate faced [[Saruman]] when he was murdered by [[Gríma]] – because of his evil deeds, his spirit was allowed to fade as Sauron's spirit faded.<ref>{{RK|VI8}}</ref>

But when [[Gandalf|Gandalf the Grey]] was killed by [[Durin's Bane]], not only was he brought back, but his spirit was significantly restrengthened into an even more powerful form, [[Gandalf|Gandalf the White]].<ref>{{TT|III5}}</ref>

[[Morgoth|Melkor]] though was the most powerful of the Ainur (greater than the rest of the Valar combined), and his spirit, instead of fading away, was exiled from [[Arda]] altogether through the [[Door of Night]] into the [[Void]]. It's prophesied that Melkor would return at the [[Final Battle|Dagor Dagorath]] in Arda's last days for one final confrontation against the Valar and the Children of Ilúvatar. In this confrontation, it is stated that he is "destroyed".<ref name="Istari" />

==Line of Melian==
One of the [[Maiar]] named [[Melian]], alone of all the Ainur, wedded an [[Elves|Elf]], King [[Thingol|Elu Thingol]] of [[Doriath]].<ref>{{S|Thingol}}</ref> From her, a strain of the Ainur entered the bloodlines of the [[Elves]] and [[Men]], passed down through generations. [[Elrond]] and [[Elros]] were Melian's descendants as well as the [[Kings of Númenor]] and their heirs.

==Etymology==
{{Pronounce|Ainur.mp3|Ardamir}}
The word ''Ainu'' is [[Quenya]] and is related to words for "holiness" such as ''[[aina]]'';<ref>{{S|Appendix}} ''aina''</ref> the female form is given as '''''Aini'''''.<ref>{{LR|Etymologies}}, entry "AYAN"</ref>

It is derived from the original [[Valarin]] word for ''Ainur'', which was '''''Ayanûz'''''.<ref>{{WJ|Quendi}}, p. 399</ref>

They are also referred to as '''Great Ones''' or '''Holy Ones'''.<ref name="Ainu" />

{{references}}
{{ainur}}
[[Category:Ainur| ]]
[[Category:Pronounced articles]]
[[Category:Quenya demonyms]]
[[Category:Races]]
[[Category:Spirits]]
[[de:Ainur]]
[[fr:encyclo/peuples/ainur/ainur]]
[[fi:Ainur]]