{{album
| image = Akallabeth CD cover.jpg
| title=Akallabêth and other Tolkien works
| type=Studio album
| artist=[[Paul Corfield Godfrey]]
| released=2017
| recorded=
| genre=Classical
| length=
| language=English
| label=[https://ascrecords.com/primafacie/ Prima Facie]
}}
'''''Akallabêth and other Tolkien works''''' is an album of music by composer [[Paul Corfield Godfrey]]'s Tolkien works - ''[[Daeron, Op. 45 (Flute and Piano)|Daeron]], [[Akallabêth (for solo piano), Op. 42|Akallabêth (for solo piano)]]'' and the ''[[Tolkien Songs, Op. 9|Tolkien Songs]]''. It also contains another song cycle, ''Mysteries of Time'', based upon non-Tolkien sources.

Featuring Tara Mcswiney (soprano), Andrew Henley (tenor), Adam Jondelius (baritone), Nicola Loten (flute), Niamh Ferris (viola), Immanuel Carl Maria Vogt (piano), and Connor Fogel (piano).

== Track listing ==
1.  Daeron (Op. 45)

2.  Strider (Tolkien Songs, Op. 9)

3.  Song of the Eagle (Tolkien Songs, Op. 9)

4.  Alive Without Breath (Tolkien Songs, Op. 9)

5.  Drinking Song (Tolkien Songs, Op. 9)

6.  In Western Lands (Tolkien Songs, Op. 9)

7.  Roads go ever ever on (Tolkien Songs, Op. 9)

8.  Shadow-Bride (Op. 33)

9.  The Mystery (Mysteries of Time, Op. 44)

10.  Cywydd (Mysteries of Time, Op. 44)

11.  Graveyard (Mysteries of Time, Op. 44)

12.  The Seven Woods of Coole (Mysteries of Time, Op. 44)

13.  The Queen of Air and Darkness (Mysteries of Time, Op. 44)

14.  Akallabêth (Op. 42)
{{title|italics}}
[[Category:Classical music]]
[[Category:Albums]]