{{infobox character
| people=[[Arnor]]ian
| name=Amlaith
| image=ElfinFen - Amlaith, king of Arthedain.jpg
| caption="Amlaith, king of Arthedain" by [[:Category:Images by ElfinFen|ElfinFen]]
| pronun=
| othernames=
| titles=[[King of Arthedain]]
| position=
| location=[[Arthedain]]
| affiliation=
| language=[[Sindarin]], [[Westron]]
| birth={{TA|726}}
| birthlocation=
| rule={{TA|861}} - {{TA|946|n}}
| death={{TA|946}}
| deathlocation=
| age=220
| notablefor=
| house=[[House of Isildur]]
| parentage=[[Eärendur (King of Arnor)|Eärendur]]
| siblings=two unnamed brothers
| spouse=
| children=[[Beleg (King of Arthedain)|Beleg]]
| gender=Male
| height=
| hair=
| eyes=
| clothing=
| weapons=
| steed=
}}
'''Amlaith''' of [[Fornost]] ({{TA|726}}<ref name="Elendil">{{PM|Elendil}}, p. 193</ref> - {{TA|946}},<ref name="north">{{App|North}}</ref> died aged 220) was the eldest son of [[Eärendur (King of Arnor)|Eärendur]], the tenth King of [[Arnor]].

==History==
He was destined to become King of [[Arnor]] after his father's death in {{TA|861}}, but there were constant quarrels between [[Eärendur (King of Arnor)|Eärendur]]'s sons. A civil war erupted when [[Eärendur (King of Arnor)|Eärendur]] finally died. Amlaith, however, failed to overcome his two younger brothers, so the Kingdom of Arnor was split into three and Amlaith became the first King of [[Arthedain]]. (His brothers founded the kingdoms of [[Cardolan]] and [[Rhudaur]]).<ref>{{App|Eriador}}</ref>

His reign in Arthedain was largely a peaceful one, although border disputes with the realms of [[Cardolan]] and [[Rhudaur]] - especially over [[Weathertop|Amon Sûl]] and the [[Weather Hills]] - never fully ceased. Under his rule the capital was formally removed from [[Annúminas]] to Fornost, due to the dwindling of the people.<ref name="Elendil"/>

Unlike his forefathers, he did not take a name in [[Quenya]],<ref>{{App|North}}, ''Arthedain''. Amlaith of Fornost, footnote</ref> the "High-elven Tongue",<ref>{{App|Elves}}, first paragraph</ref> but instead took a name in [[Sindarin]], as did all the [[Kings of Arthedain]] and [[Chieftains of the Dúnedain]] that descended from him.<ref>{{PM|Elendil}}, manuscript C with corrections and expansions, The Northern Line of Arnor: the Isildurioni, 10. Earendur, p. 192 using Noldorin, which was later renamend to Sindarin.</ref><ref>{{PM|Third}}, manuscript T4, The Third Age year 861 using Noldorin, which was later renamed to Sindarin</ref>

Amlaith ruled for eighty-five years, and was succeeded at his death in 946 by his son, [[Beleg (King of Arthedain)|Beleg]].<ref name="north"/>

== Etymology ==
''Amlaith'' is a [[Sindarin]] name. Its meaning is not glossed, but Mark Fisher suggests it might contain the elements ''[[am]]'' ("up") and ''laith'' (as in the name of the river ''[[Limlaith]]'' where ''laith'' means "light").<ref>{{webcite|author=Mark Fisher|articleurl=https://www.glyphweb.com/arda/a/amlaith.php|articlename=Amlaith of Fornost|website=The Encyclopedia of Arda|accessed=28 January 2022}}</ref>

==Genealogy==
{{familytree/start}}
{{familytree | | | | | ELE | | | | |ELE=[[Elendur (King of Arnor)|Elendur]]<br/><small>''{{TA|552|n}} - {{TA|777|n}}''</small>}}
{{familytree | | | | | |!| | | | | |}}
{{familytree | | | | | EAR | | | | |EAR=[[Eärendur (King of Arnor)|Eärendur]]<br/><small>''{{TA|640|n}} - {{TA|861|n}}''</small>}}
{{familytree | |,|-|-|-|+|-|-|-|.| |}}
{{familytree | AML | | CAR | | RHU |AML='''AMLAITH'''<br/><small>''{{TA|726|n}} - {{TA|946|n}}''</small>|CAR=[[Kings of Cardolan|''Kings of<br/>Cardolan'']]|RHU=[[Kings of Rhudaur|''Kings of<br/>Rhudaur'']]}}
{{familytree | |!| | | | | | | | | |}}
{{familytree | BEL | | | | | | | | |BEL=[[Beleg (King of Arthedain)|Beleg]]<br/><small>''{{TA|811|n}} - {{TA|1029|n}}''</small>}}
{{familytree | |!| | | | | | | | | |}}
{{familytree | MAL| | | | | | | | |MAL=[[Mallor]]<br/><small>''{{TA|895|n}} - {{TA|1110|n}}''</small>}}
{{familytree | |:| | | | | | | | | |}}
{{familytree | ART | | | | | | | | |ART=[[Kings of Arthedain|''Kings of<br/>Arthedain'']]}}
{{familytree/end}}

==Portrayal in adaptations==
'''2007: ''[[The Lord of the Rings Online]]'':'''
:Before relocating his people from Annuminas to Fornost, Amlaith had asked Gwindeth, the [[River-woman|River-maiden]] of [[Nenuial]], to raise the waters of the lake over the walls of Annuminas and allow the flood to preserve what treasures remained here.

{{references}}
{{seq-start}}
{{seq-head
| race=arnorian
| house=[[House of Isildur]]<small><br/>Cadet branch of [[House of Elros]]</small>
| born={{TA|726}}
| died={{TA|946}}
}}
{{seq
| prev=[[Eärendur (King of Arnor)|Eärendur]]
| list=9th [[Heir of Isildur|Heir]] of [[Isildur]]
| dates={{TA|861}} - {{TA|946|n}}
| next=[[Beleg (King of Arthedain)|Beleg]]
| nrow=2
}}
{{seq
| pvac=None
| prev=''[[Eärendur (King of Arnor)|Eärendur]], as [[Kings of Arnor|King of Arnor]]''
| list=1st [[Kings of Arthedain|King of Arthedain]]
| dates={{TA|861}} - {{TA|946|n}}
}}
{{seq-end}}

{{northernline}}

[[Category:House of Isildur]]
[[Category:Rulers of Arthedain]]
[[Category:Sindarin names]]
[[Category:Third Age characters]]
[[de:Amlaith]]
[[fi:Amlaith]]