{{object infobox
| name=Anglachel
| image = Elena Kukanova - Anglachel.jpg
| caption="Eöl's Swords" by [[:Category:Images by María Lombide Ezpeleta|María Lombide Ezpeleta]]
| pronun=
| othernames=
| location=[[Nan Elmoth]], [[Menegroth]]
| owner=[[Thingol]], [[Beleg]], [[Túrin]]
| type=Weapon
| appearance=A glowing black blade that could slice through iron; forged from a meteorite
| creator=[[Eöl]]
| created=[[First Age]]
| createdlocation=[[Nan Elmoth]]
| destroyer=
| destroyed=Reforged as [[Gurthang]]
| destroyedlocation=
| notablefor=killing of [[Beleg]] by [[Túrin]]
}}
{{Quote|[Anglachel] was a sword of great worth, and it was so named because it was made of iron that fell from heaven as a blazing star; it would cleave all earth-delved iron.|''[[Quenta Silmarillion]]'', "[[Of Túrin Turambar]]"}}

'''Anglachel''' was one of two swords forged by [[Eöl]] the [[Dark Elf]] (its mate was [[Anguirel]]). Forged from an [[Wikipedia:Iron meteorite|iron meteorite]], the blade was black but also glowed with a 'pale fire', and was so hard that it could easily slice through iron. It was said that the sword was imbued with Eöl's malice and was apparently sentient.

==History==
Eöl gave Anglachel to his overlord, King [[Thingol]] of [[Doriath]], as payment for letting him dwell in the [[Nan Elmoth|Forest of Nan Elmoth]]. Thingol would not wield the sword, as his wife [[Melian]] warned him that there was malice in the blade, so it stayed in the armoury of [[Menegroth]].{{fact}}

In {{FA|487}}, Thingol allowed [[Beleg|Beleg Strongbow]] to take any weapon he desired in his search of his friend [[Túrin]], and Beleg took Anglachel. However, he would not return to Doriath after finding Túrin, and would fight by his side in the following years.

Once their emplacement was destroyed by [[Morgoth]]'s armies, Beleg tracked down the [[Orcs]] taking Túrin captive to [[Angband]]. In the dead of night, he sought to free Túrin in secret, but when he used Anglachel to cut Túrin's bonds, the spite of the blade's forger made it slip and pricked the unconscious body of Túrin. Awakening from his stupor, Túrin thought the Orcs had returned to torture him, and during the struggle he slew Beleg with the blade. After the fight, Anglachel's edges became dull and turned a dead black, ceasing to glow. This was attributed to its apparent sentience, as Anglachel was in a state of mourning over the slaying of Beleg.

Túrin later reforged the sword with the help of the smiths of [[Nargothrond]]. The blade remained black, however, and Túrin renamed it '''[[Gurthang]]''', meaning 'Iron of Death', and it would become his reknowned sword thereafter.<ref>{{S|Turin}}</ref>

==Etymology==
[[Christopher Tolkien]] notes that ''Anglachel'' contains the [[Sindarin]] elements ''[[ang]]'' ("iron") and ''[[lhach]]'' ("leaping flame").<ref>{{S|Appendix}}, entries ''ang'', ''lhach''</ref> Given that the last element is clearly ''[[êl]]'' ("star"), [[Paul Strack]] glosses the name as "Iron of the flaming star".<ref>{{webcite|author=[[Paul Strack]]|articleurl=https://eldamo.org/content/words/word-3718423919.html|articlename=S. ''Anglachel'' pn. |website=Eldamo|accessed=6 December 2022}}</ref>

==See also==
*[[Gurthang]]

{{References}}

{{weapons}}
[[Category:Sindarin names]]
[[Category:Swords]]
[[de:Gurthang]]
[[fr:encyclo/artefacts/armes/anglachel]]
[[fi:Anglachel]]