{{infobox character
| people=[[Sindar|Sinda]]
| name=Annael
| image=Svirina Vera - Rian gives Tuor to Annael.jpg
| caption="Rían gives Tuor to Annael" by [[:Category:Images by Svirina Vera|Svirina Vera]]
| pronun=
| othernames=
| titles=
| position=
| location=[[Mithrim]], [[Androth]], [[Mouths of Sirion]]
| affiliation=
| language=[[Sindarin]]
| birth=
| birthlocation=
| rule=
| death=
| deathlocation=
| age=
| notablefor=
| house=
| parentage=
| siblings=
| spouse=
| children=fostered [[Tuor]]
| gender=Male
| height=
| hair=
| eyes=
| clothing=
| weapons=
| steed=
}} 
'''Annael''' was a [[Sindar|Sinda]] of the [[Elves of Mithrim]] in the [[First Age]].

==History==
Annael was the leader of a small group of Grey-elves at Mithrim, having the [[swan]] as his [[Heraldry|token]].<ref name="Tuor">{{UT|Tuor}}, pp. 17-25</ref>

The Sindar of [[Hithlum]] joined the [[Union of Maedhros]], but after the disastrous [[Nirnaeth Arnoediad]], Annael was the only Sinda who returned.

While [[Rían]] was hosted by the Grey-elves at [[Lake Mithrim]] during the birth of her son [[Tuor]], she asked them to foster him, as she wished to part in search of her husband [[Huor]]. Annael explained to her how Huor had died, and she left to die at the [[Hill of the Slain]].<ref name="Tuor" /><ref>{{S|Turin}}</ref> Thus Annael became the foster-father of Tuor during his early years.<ref name="Quenta">{{S|Gondolin}}</ref>

As years passed, in order to seek refuge from [[Easterlings (First Age)|Easterlings]] and [[Orcs]], Annael led his small group of people to the caves of [[Androth]]. When Tuor was sixteen years of age, Annael had to prevent him from going to fight against the enemies of [[House of Hador|his House]], [[Foresight|foreseeing]] that [[Morgoth|Morgoth's]] power would not be defeated until [[Thangorodrim]] [[War of Wrath|was overthrown]], and that they had to march South to [[Annon-in-Gelydh]], which was built by [[Turgon]] long ago. Tuor was much intrigued by the name of Turgon and wished to meet him, but Annael told him how well hidden Turgon's [[Gondolin|realm]] was.<ref name="Tuor" />

Despite having parted in secret from Androth, Annael's people were located and ambushed by a large force of Orcs and Easterlings. The Elves were all scattered, and Tuor was captured. However, Annael and many of his folk escaped [[Dor-lómin]] and joined [[Círdan]] in the [[Mouths of Sirion|distant south]] of [[Beleriand]].<ref name="Tuor" /><ref name="Quenta" />

==Etymology==
''Annael'' is clearly [[Sindarin]], but it is never glossed. It may contain the [[Quenya]]/[[Sindarin]] elements ''[[anna]]'' ("gift") and ''[[el]]'' ("star").

{{References}}
[[Category:Characters in The Children of Húrin]]
[[Category:Characters in The Silmarillion]]
[[Category:First Age characters]]
[[Category:Moriquendi]]
[[Category:Sindar]]
[[Category:Sindarin names]]
[[de:Annael]]
[[fr:encyclo/personnages/elfes/teleri/sindar/annael]]
[[fi:Annael]]