{{infobox character
| people=[[Númenóreans|Númenórean]]
| name=Ar-Adûnakhôr<ref name=Ar-Adunakhor>{{UT|Kings}}, entry XX ''Ar-Adûnakhôr (Tar-Herunúmen)''</ref>
| image=
| caption=
| pronun=
| othernames=''Tar-Herunúmen'' ([[Quenya|Q]])<ref name=Ar-Adunakhor/>
| titles=[[King of Númenor]]
| position=
| location=[[Númenor]]
| affiliation=[[King's Men]]
| language=[[Adûnaic]]
| birth={{SA|2709}}<ref name=Ar-Adunakhor/>
| birthlocation=
| rule={{SA|2899}} - {{SA|2962|n}} (63 years)<ref name=Ar-Adunakhor/>
| death={{SA|2962}}<ref name=Ar-Adunakhor/>
| deathlocation=
| age=253
| notablefor=
| house=[[House of Elros]]
| parentage=[[Tar-Ardamin]]<ref name=Tar-Ardamin>{{UT|Kings}}, entry XIX ''Tar-Ardamin''</ref>
| siblings=
| spouse=
| children=[[Ar-Zimrathôn]]<ref name=Ar-Zimrathon>{{UT|Kings}}, entry XXI ''Ar-Zimrathôn''</ref>
| gender=Male
| height=
| hair=
| eyes=
| clothing=
| weapons=
| steed=
}}
'''Ar-Adûnakhôr''' was the son of King [[Tar-Ardamin]] and the twentieth [[King of Númenor]].<ref name=Ar-Adunakhor/>

==History==
Adûnakhôr was born in a time when most [[Númenóreans]] already had stopped using the [[Elvish|Elven tongues]] generations before, although it was still customary for the [[Kings of Númenor]] to take their royal names in [[Quenya]].

When Ar-Adûnakhôr succeeded his father, however, he was the first King to break with tradition and took his title in [[Adûnaic]].<ref name=Ar-Adunakhor/><ref name=AppAr-Adunakhor>{{App|Numenor}}, paragraph about king Ar-Adûnakhôr</ref> Tar-Herunúmen, a name in [[Quenya]] was still recorded in the [[Scroll of Kings]], because the kings feared that a break with this ancient custom could cause evil to befall.<ref name=Ar-Adunakhor/><ref>{{S|Akallabeth}}</ref>

His names were perceived as blasphemous and ill-omened<ref name=AppAr-Adunakhor/> by the [[Faithful]] Númenóreans, because they mean "Lord of the West", a title that the Faithful only used for one of the [[Valar]], especially [[Manwë]].<ref name=Ar-Adunakhor/>

During his reign the Elven-tongues were no longer used, nor permitted to be taught, but were maintained in secret by the Faithful. After that elven ships from [[Tol Eressëa]] only came seldom and secretly to the west shores of Númenor.<ref name=Ar-Adunakhor/>

Númenórean settlers in the north of [[Middle-earth]] (between the [[Gulf of Lune]] and the city of [[Pelargir]]) refused to participate in the rebellion against the Valar and were joined by many exiles of the Faithful who fled from persecution by Ar-Adûnakhôr and the later Kings of Númenor. During the reign of Ar-Adûnakhôr the term "[[Middle Men]]" originated from these settlers.<ref>{{PM|Atani}}</ref>

He was succeeded to the throne by his son, [[Ar-Zimrathôn]].<ref name=Ar-Zimrathon/><ref>{{App|Numenor}}, paragraphs with the names of the Kings and Queens of Númenor</ref>

== Etymology and names ==
''Adûnakhôr'' is an [[Adûnaic]] name that means "Lord of the West".<ref name=Ar-Adunakhor/> It can be analyzed as ''[[adûn]]'' "West" ([[Sindarin|S.]] ''dûn'') and ''khôr'' "Lord" ([[Quenya|Q.]] ''heru''). It is said that as a title, it signifies [[Manwë]]. Although the name was taken in defiance of [[Quenya]], ironically its elements are said to be of [[Elvish]] origin.<ref>{{webcite||author=[[Helge Fauskanger]]|website=Arda|articleurl=http://folk.uib.no/hnohf/adunaic.htm|articlename=Adûnaic - the vernacular of Númenor}}</ref> See also ''[[Ar#Adûnaic|ar-]]''.

''Herunúmen'' is a [[Quenya]] name that means "Lord of the West".<ref name=Ar-Adunakhor/> Ostensibly a compound of [[heru]] ("lord") and [[númen]] ("west").<ref>{{webcite|author=Paul Strack|articleurl=https://www.eldamo.org/content/words/word-517668579.html|articlename=Q. ''Herunúmen'' m.|website=Eldamo|accessed=12 January 2022}}</ref> Like for all the rulers of Númenor whose name was inscribed in the Scroll of Kings, the prefix ''[[tar]]-'' ("high") was added to his name.<ref>{{UT|Kings}}, first paragraph and entry I to XXV</ref>

== Genealogy ==
{{familytree/start}}
{{familytree | | | CAL | | |CAL=[[Tar-Calmacil]]<br/><small>''{{SA|2516|n}} - {{SA|2825|n}}''</small>}}
{{familytree | |,|-|^|-|.| |}}
{{familytree | ARD | | GIM |ARD=[[Tar-Ardamin]]<br/><small>''{{SA|2618|n}} - {{SA|2899|n}}''</small>|GIM=[[Gimilzagar]]<br/><small>''b. {{SA|2630|n}}''</small>}}
{{familytree | |!| | | | | |}}
{{familytree | ADU | | | | |ADU='''AR-ADÛNAKHÔR'''<br/><small>''{{SA|2709|n}} - {{SA|2962|n}}''</small>}}
{{familytree | |!| | | | | |}}
{{familytree | ZIM | | | | |ZIM=[[Ar-Zimrathôn]]<br/><small>''{{SA|2798|n}} - {{SA|3033|n}}''</small>}}
{{familytree | |!| | | | | |}}
{{familytree | SAK | | | | |SAK=[[Ar-Sakalthôr]]<br/><small>''{{SA|2876|n}} - {{SA|3102|n}}''</small>}}
{{familytree/end}}

{{References}}
{{seq-start}}
{{seq-head
| race=numenorean
| house=[[House of Elros]]
| born={{SA|2709}}
| died={{SA|2962}}
}}
{{seq
| prev=[[Tar-Ardamin]]
| list=20th [[King of Númenor]]
| dates={{SA|2899}} - {{SA|2962|n}}
| next=[[Ar-Zimrathôn]]
}}
{{seq-end}}

{{numenorkings}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:ArAdunakhor}}
[[Category:Characters in The Silmarillion]]
[[Category:House of Elros]]
[[Category:Rulers of Númenor]]
[[Category:King's Men]]
[[Category:Second Age characters]]
[[Category:Númenóreans]]
[[de:Ar-Adûnakhôr]]
[[fi:Ar-Adûnakhôr]]
[[fr:encyclo/personnages/hommes/2a/numenoreens/ar-adunakhor]]