{{infobox character
| people=[[Arnor]]ian
| name=Araphor
| image=
| caption=
| pronun=
| othernames=
| titles=[[King of Arthedain]]
| position=
| location=[[Arthedain]]
| affiliation=
| language=[[Sindarin]], [[Westron]]
| birth={{TA|1391}}
| birthlocation=
| rule={{TA|1409}} - {{TA|1589|n}}
| death={{TA|1589}}
| deathlocation=
| age=198
| notablefor=
| house=[[House of Isildur]]
| parentage=[[Arveleg I]]
| siblings=
| spouse=
| children=[[Argeleb II]]
| gender=Male
| height=
| hair=
| eyes=
| clothing=
| weapons=
| steed=
}}
'''Araphor''' ({{TA|1391}}<ref>{{PM|Elendil}}, p. 194</ref> - {{TA|1589|n}},<ref name="North">{{App|North}}</ref> died aged 198) was the ninth king of [[Arthedain]], succeeding his father, [[Arveleg I]], upon his death in 1409. 

==History==
Araphor was only eighteen years old when he came to the throne of Arthedain because his father was killed in battle in the defence of [[Weathertop|Amon Sûl]]. Although young, Araphor was valiant and he avenged his father by repelling the enemy from [[Fornost]] and the [[North Downs]] with the aid of [[Círdan]] of [[Lindon]]. The remnant faithful of the [[Dúnedain]] in [[Cardolan]] also helped repel the enemy from the [[Barrow-downs|Tyrn Gorthad]], or took refuge in the [[Old Forest|forest]] behind.

It was during the wars with Angmar, and the reign of Araphor, that the [[Stoors]] living in the [[Angle of Eriador|Angle]] (between the rivers [[Hoarwell]] and [[Loudwater]]) continued to move west and south away from Rhudaur out of dread. Some of the Stoors went back over the [[Misty Mountains]] to dwell beside the [[Gladden River|Gladden]] become the fisherfolk from which [[Sméagol]] and [[Déagol]] descended.<ref>{{App|Eriador}}</ref>

Also during Araphor's rule, there were many problems in [[Gondor]] including the [[Kin-strife]], the burning of [[Osgiliath]] (and the loss of its ''[[palantír]]''), and wars with the people of [[Harad]] and [[Umbar]].<ref>{{App|Gondor}}</ref>

Araphor ruled for 180 years - the second-longest ruler of the Northern Line (after [[Valandil (King of Arnor)|Valandil]]) - and was succeeded by his son, [[Argeleb II]], upon his death in {{TA|1589|n}}.<ref name="North"/>

==Etymology==
''Araphor'' is a [[Sindarin]] name.<ref name=Tolkiendil>{{webcite|author=Association Tolkiendil|articleurl=https://www.tolkiendil.com/langues/english/i-lam_arth/compound_sindarin_names|articlename=Compound Sindarin Names in Middle-earth|website=Tolkiendil|accessed=03 February 2022}}</ref><ref name=Eldamo>{{webcite|author=Paul Strack|articleurl=https://www.eldamo.org/content/words/word-386644097.html|articlename=S. ''Araphor'' m.|website=Eldamo|accessed=03 February 2022}}</ref><ref name=GS>{{HM|GS}}, p. 342</ref><ref>{{App|Elves}}, footnote after "''Eldarin'' form"</ref><ref>{{App|North}}, footnote after "Amlaith of Fornost"</ref><ref>{{PM|Elendil}}, manuscript C, The Heirs of Elendil, The Northern Line of Arnor: the Isildurioni, 10. Earendur, "used Elvish names of Noldorin form"</ref> Its meaning is not glossed. The Association Tolkiendil suggests it means "Royal Fist".<ref name=Tolkiendil/> [[David Salo]] suggests it means "king of the fist".<ref name=GS/> The Association Tolkiendil, [[Paul Strack]] and David Salo suggest that it is a combination of ''[[aran]]''<ref>{{App|North}}, footnote after "Malvegil 1349,"</ref> ("king", "lord", "chief", [lit.] high or noble person) and ''[[paur]]'' ("fist").<ref name=Tolkiendil/><ref name=Eldamo/><ref name=GS/>

== Genealogy ==
{{familytree/start}}
{{familytree | ARG |ARG=[[Argeleb I]]<br/><small>''{{TA|1226|n}} - {{TA|1356|n}}''†</small>}}
{{familytree | |!| |}}
{{familytree | ARV |ARV=[[Arveleg I]]<br/><small>''{{TA|1309|n}} - {{TA|1409|n}}''†</small>}}
{{familytree | |!| |}}
{{familytree | ARA |ARA='''ARAPHOR'''<br/><small>''{{TA|1391|n}} - {{TA|1589|n}}''</small>}}
{{familytree | |!| |}}
{{familytree | ARG |ARG=[[Argeleb II]]<br/><small>''{{TA|1473|n}} - {{TA|1670|n}}''</small>}}
{{familytree | |!| |}}
{{familytree | ARV |ARV=[[Arvegil]]<br/><small>''{{TA|1553|n}} - {{TA|1743|n}}''</small>}}
{{familytree/end}}

{{references}}
{{seq-start}}
{{seq-head
| race=arnorian
| house=[[House of Isildur]]<small><br/>Cadet branch of [[House of Elros]]</small>
| born={{TA|1391}}
| died={{TA|1589}}
}}
{{seq
| prow=2
| prev=[[Arveleg I]]
| list=17th [[Heir of Isildur|Heir]] of [[Isildur]]
| dates={{TA|1409}} - {{TA|1589|n}}
| next=[[Argeleb II]]
| nrow=2
}}
{{seq
| list=9th [[Kings of Arthedain|King of Arthedain]]
| dates={{TA|1409}} - {{TA|1589|n}}
}}
{{seq-end}}

{{northernline}}
[[Category:House of Isildur]]
[[Category:Rulers of Arthedain]]
[[Category:Sindarin names]]
[[Category:Third Age characters]]
[[de:Araphor]]
[[fr:encyclo/personnages/hommes/3a/dunedain/dunedain du nord/araphor]]
[[fi:Araphor]]