{{infobox character
| people=[[Arnor]]ian
| name=Aratan
| image=The Lord of the Rings Online - Aratan.jpg
| caption=Aratan in ''[[The Lord of the Rings Online]]''
| pronun=[[Quenya|Q]], {{IPA|[ˈaratan]}}
| othernames=
| titles=
| position=
| location=[[Gondor]]
| affiliation=
| language=[[Sindarin]], [[Westron]]
| birth={{SA|3339}}<ref name="Elendil">{{PM|Elendil}}</ref>
| birthlocation=[[Gondor]]
| rule=
| death={{TA|2}}
| deathlocation=[[Disaster of the Gladden Fields]]
| age=104
| notablefor=
| house=[[House of Isildur]]
| parentage=[[Isildur]]
| siblings=[[Elendur (son of Isildur)|Elendur]], [[Ciryon]] and [[Valandil (King of Arnor)|Valandil]]
| spouse=
| children=
| gender=Male
| height=
| hair=
| eyes=
| clothing=
| weapons=
| steed=
}}
'''Aratan''' was the second son of [[Isildur]].

==History==
In the War of the [[Last Alliance of Elves and Men]], Aratan and his brother [[Ciryon]] did not participate in the [[Siege of Barad-dûr]].  Isildur had sent these two brothers to man [[Minas Ithil]] so as to guard [[Cirith Dúath]] and prevent a possible breakout of [[Sauron]] should he escape the siege.<ref>{{UT|7a}}, note 11</ref>

In the [[Disaster of the Gladden Fields]], Ciryon was the first brother to fall; Aratan was mortally wounded while trying to save him.  After Aratan was wounded, [[Elendur (son of Isildur)|Elendur]] advised his father to put on [[the One Ring]] and escape.<ref>{{UT|Gladden}}</ref>

==Etymology==
''Aratan'' is a [[Quenya]] name. Its meaning is not glossed, but Paul Stracks suggests it means "Noble Man" and is a compound of ''[[ar|(a)ra-]]'' ("noble") and ''[[atan]]'' ("Man").<ref>{{webcite|author=Paul Strack|articleurl=https://www.eldamo.org/content/words/word-2211246019.html|articlename=Q. ''Aratan'' m.|website=Eldamo|accessed=27 January 2022}}</ref>

==Genealogy==
{{familytree/start}}
{{familytree | | | | | | | | | | | | ELE | | | | | |ELE=[[Elendil]]<br/><small>''{{SA|3119}} - {{SA|3441|n}}''†</small>}}
{{familytree | | | | | | | |,|-|-|-|-|^|-|-|-|-|.| |}}
{{familytree | | | | | | | ISI | | | | | | | | ANA |ISI=[[Isildur]]<br/><small>''{{SA|3209}} - {{TA|2}}''†</small>|ANA=[[Anárion]]<br/><small>''{{SA|3219}} - {{SA|3440|n}}''†</small>}}
{{familytree | |,|-|-|-|v|-|^|-|v|-|-|-|.| | | |:| |}}
{{familytree | ELE | | ARA | | CIR | | VAL | | GON |ELE=[[Elendur (son of Isildur)|Elendur]]<br/><small>''{{SA|3299}} - {{TA|2}}''†</small>|ARA='''ARATAN'''<br/><small>''{{SA|3339}} - {{TA|2}}''†</small>|CIR=[[Ciryon]]<br/><small>''{{SA|3379}} - {{TA|2}}''†</small>|VAL=[[Valandil (King of Arnor)|Valandil]]<br/><small>''{{SA|3430}} - {{TA|249}}''</small>|GON=[[Kings of Gondor|''Kings of<br/>Gondor'']]}}
{{familytree | | | | | | | | | | | | | |!| | | | | |}}
{{familytree | | | | | | | | | | | | | ELD | | | | |ELD=[[Eldacar (King of Arnor)|Eldacar]]<br/><small>''{{TA|87}} - {{TA|339|n}}''</small>}}
{{familytree | | | | | | | | | | | | | |!| | | | | |}}
{{familytree | | | | | | | | | | | | | ARA | | | | |ARA=[[Arantar]]<br/><small>''{{TA|185}} - {{TA|435|n}}''</small>}}
{{familytree/end}}

==Other versions of the legendarium==
In early manuscripts Aratan was named "Eärnur".<ref name="Elendil"/>

==Portrayal in adaptations==
'''2019: ''[[The Lord of the Rings Online]]'':'''
:The three elder sons of Isildur appear during an extended flashback set during the [[Siege of Barad-dûr]] in the year [[Second Age 3440|S.A. 3440]]. However, because the game's license does not cover the works in which they are named, they are referred to only by their war-time aliases, meant to hide their kinship with the King. Aratan uses the name "Ornaher" as his alias.

{{references}}
[[Category:Characters in The Silmarillion]]
[[Category:House of Isildur]]
[[Category:Quenya names]]
[[Category:Second Age characters]]
[[Category:Third Age characters]]
[[de:Aratan]]
[[fr:encyclo/personnages/hommes/2a/numenoreens/aratan]]
[[fi:Aratan]]