{{infobox character
| people=[[Arnor]]ian
| name=Araval
| image=
| caption=
| pronun=
| othernames=
| titles=[[King of Arthedain]]
| position=
| location=[[Arthedain]]
| affiliation=
| language=[[Sindarin]], [[Westron]]
| birth={{TA|1711}}
| birthlocation=
| rule={{TA|1813}} - {{TA|1891|n}}
| death={{TA|1891}}
| deathlocation=
| age=180
| notablefor=
| house=[[House of Isildur]]
| parentage=[[Arveleg II]]
| siblings=
| spouse=
| children=[[Araphant]]
| gender=Male
| height=
| hair=
| eyes=
| clothing=
| weapons=
| steed=
}}
'''Araval''' ({{TA|1711}} - {{TA|1891|n}},<ref name=North>{{App|North}}</ref> died aged 180) was thirteenth king of [[Arthedain]], coming to the throne in 1813 after the death of his father, [[Arveleg II]].<ref name=Elendil>{{PM|Elendil}}, pp. 195, 209-210</ref>

==History==
When Araval came to the throne Arthedain had been at war with [[Angmar]] for 400 years, and the [[Dúnedain]] had achieved very little in preventing the power of this old enemy from spreading. 

Araval, in coalition with the [[Elves]] of [[Lindon]] and [[Rivendell]], went to battle with the forces of Angmar in {{TA|1851}} and returned victorious. After this victory, Araval attempted to re-occupy [[Cardolan]], but the "evil [[wights]]" (likely referring to the [[Barrow-wights]]) terrified anyone who attempted to dwell there.<ref name=Elendil/>

Unfortunately, Araval's victory was of no avail in the long term: under [[Araphant]], Araval's son, Angmar recovered and continued its attacks on Arnor; and under [[Arvedui]], Araval's grandson, Angmar finally defeated Arthedain, laying Arnor to waste and scattering the remnants of the Dúnedain.

Araval ruled Arthedain for seventy-eight years, and was succeeded by his son [[Araphant]] upon his death in 1891.<ref name=North/><ref name=Elendil/>

== Etymology ==
''Araval'' is [[Sindarin]]. Its meaning is not glossed. It means likely "Golden King"<ref>{{HM|IE}}, p. 72</ref> or "King of Gold".<ref>{{webcite|author=[[David Salo]]|articleurl=https://tolkienlistsearch.herokuapp.com/message/5e9c35f3e141f533245661a0|articlename=Re: &#91;S&#93; Provection|dated=2004-11-20|website=[[Elfling]]|accessed=2022-09-22}} and {{webcite|author=[[David Salo]]|articleurl=https://tolkienlistsearch.herokuapp.com/message/5e9c35f3e141f533245661a6|articlename=Re: &#91;S&#93; Provection|dated=2004-11-20|website=[[Elfling]]|accessed=2022-09-22}}</ref> Paul Strack explains, that the intial element of his name is [[ara]] ("noble") and its final element might be the [[Lenition|lenited]] form ''val'' of [[malt]] ("gold") (as suggested by David Salo).<ref>{{webcite|author=Paul Strack|articleurl=https://www.eldamo.org/content/words/word-868235173.html|articlename=S. ''Araval'' m.|website=Eldamo|accessed=29 July 2021}}</ref> His [[#Other versions of the legendarium|earlier name]] ''Arvallen''<ref>{{PM|Elendil}}, Commentary, commentary to the kings from Argeleb I to Arvedui,  23. p. 209</ref> possibly contains ''mallen'' ("golden") and has a similar meaning. It is comparable to ''[[Argeleb (disambiguation)|Argeleb]]'' ("Lord of Silver").

== Genealogy ==
{{familytree/start}}
{{familytree | ARV |ARV=[[Arvegil]]<br/><small>''{{TA|1553|n}} - {{TA|1743|n}}''</small>}}
{{familytree | |!| |}}
{{familytree | ARV ||ARV=[[Arveleg II]]<br/><small>''{{TA|1633|n}} - {{TA|1813|n}}''</small>}}
{{familytree | |!| |}}
{{familytree | ARA |ARA='''ARAVAL'''<br/><small>''{{TA|1711|n}} - {{TA|1891|n}}''</small>}}
{{familytree | |!| |}}
{{familytree | ARA |ARA=[[Araphant]]<br/><small>''{{TA|1789|n}} - {{TA|1964|n}}''</small>}}
{{familytree | |!| |}}
{{familytree | ARV |ARV=[[Arvedui]]<br/><small>''{{TA|1864|n}} - {{TA|1974|n}}''†</small>}}
{{familytree/end}}

== Other versions of the legendarium ==
In another manuscript, Araval is said to have driven the evil wights north. An early name for Araval was ''Arvallen''.<ref name=Elendil/>

{{references}}
{{seq-start}}
{{seq-head
| race=arnorian
| house=[[House of Isildur]]<small><br/>Cadet branch of [[House of Elros]]</small>
| born={{TA|1711}}
| died={{TA|1891}}
}}
{{seq
| prow=2
| prev=[[Arveleg II]]
| list=21st [[Heir of Isildur|Heir]] of [[Isildur]]
| dates={{TA|1813}} - {{TA|1891|n}}
| next=[[Araphant]]
| nrow=2
}}
{{seq
| list=13th [[Kings of Arthedain|King of Arthedain]]
| dates={{TA|1813}} - {{TA|1891|n}}
}}
{{seq-end}}

{{northernline}}

[[Category:House of Isildur]]
[[Category:Rulers of Arthedain]]
[[Category:Sindarin names]]
[[Category:Third Age characters]]

[[de:Araval]]
[[fi:Araval]]
[[fr:encyclo/personnages/hommes/3a/dunedain/dunedain du nord/araval]]