{{location infobox
| name=Ard-galen
| image=Marya Filatova - Peaceful Years - Aegnor.jpeg
| caption="Peaceful Years - Aegnor" by Marya Filatova
| pronun=
| othernames=Later known [[Anfauglith]] and [[Dor-nu-Fauglith]]
| location=South of [[Ered Engrin]], west of [[Ered Luin]], north-west of [[Lothlann]], east of [[Ered Wethrin]]
| type=Plain
| description=Large, green grassy plain
| regions=
| towns=
| inhabitants=
| created=
| destroyed={{FA|455}}, [[Dagor Bragollach]]
| events=
}}
'''Ard-galen''' ([[Sindarin|S]]. ''[[ardh]]'' "region" + ''[[calen]]'' "green"), later ''[[Anfauglith]]'', was the wide green plain that lay north of the highlands of [[Dorthonion]] and south of [[Morgoth]]'s fortress of [[Angband]] in the [[Iron Mountains]], in the [[First Age]].<ref>{{S|Map}}</ref>

==History==
In the first days after the rising of the [[Sun]], Ard-galen was a green plain with rich grass, reaching from [[Hithlum]] and the [[Ered Wethrin]] in the west to the [[Ered Luin]] in the east, and rising into highlands of [[Dorthonion]] in the south.

In the aftermath of the [[Dagor-nuin-Giliath]], the Battle-under-Stars that was fought when the Host of [[Fëanor]] was attacked in [[Mithrim]], the fleeing [[Orcs]] were hunted over the mountains and into the plain of Ard-galen.  The Orcs were driven into the [[Fen of Serech]] and few escaped to return to Angband.<ref name="Return">{{S|Return}}</ref>  Thereafter Ard-galen would be the site of many battles.

The next clash that occurred upon Ard-galen was the [[Dagor Aglareb]], the Glorious Battle in which Morgoth suddenly sent forth a host of Orcs to try the strength of the [[Elves]].  As the Orcs assaulted Dorthonion the armies of [[Fingolfin]] and [[Maedhros]] struck both their flanks.  Again the Orcs were routed as the Elves pursued them across Ard-galen to the very gates of Angband, and none of the enemy’s soldiers survived.<ref name="Return"/>

During the [[Siege of Angband]], [[Glaurung]] assaulted Ard-galen and pushed the [[Noldor]] from Ard-galen, which he took and defiled, to Dorthonion and the [[Ered Wethrin]]. This victory was short-lived, however, and Glaurung was forced back to Angband when [[Fingon]] rode against him with a company of mounted archers. 

The plain of Ard-galen was laid waste by rivers of flame and poisonous gases at the beginning of the [[Dagor Bragollach]].  Thereafter a desolate waste, it was renamed [[Anfauglith]] ("Gasping Dust").<ref>{{S|Fingolfin}}</ref>

The battle of [[Nirnaeth Arnoediad]] was fought in the plain, and the dead piled up in a hill in the midst of the plain, named ''[[Haudh-en-Ndengin]]'', the [[Hill of Slain]], by the [[Elves]], and ''[[Haudh-en-Nirnaeth]]'', the [[Hill of Tears]], and grass grew again upon the hill and nowhere else in [[Anfauglith]].<ref>{{S|Fifth}}</ref>

Like the other lands around it, [[Anfauglith]] sank beneath the waves after the [[War of Wrath]] at the end of the First Age.<ref>{{S|Earendil}}</ref>

{{references}}
[[Category:Beleriand]]
[[Category:Sindarin locations]]
[[Category:Fields, plains and deserts]]

[[de:Ard-galen]]
[[fi:Ard-galen]]
[[fr:encyclo/geographie/regions/beleriand/ard-galen]]