{{disambig-two|the seventh [[Kings of Arthedain|King]] of [[Arthedain]]|tenth King|[[Argeleb II]]}}
{{infobox character
| people=[[Arnor]]ian
| name=Argeleb I
| image=Argeleb I.jpg
| caption=Argeleb I from ''[[The Lord of the Rings: The Battle for Middle-earth II: The Rise of the Witch-king|The Rise of the Witch-king]]''
| pronun=
| othernames=
| titles=[[King of Arthedain]]
| position=
| location=[[Arthedain]]
| affiliation=
| language=[[Sindarin]], [[Westron]]
| birth={{TA|1226}}
| birthlocation=
| rule={{TA|1349}} - {{TA|1356|n}}
| death={{TA|1356}}
| deathlocation=[[Rhudaur]]
| age=130
| notablefor=
| house=[[House of Isildur]]
| parentage=[[Malvegil]]
| siblings=
| spouse=
| children=[[Arveleg I]]
| gender=Male
| height=
| hair=
| eyes=
| clothing=
| weapons=
| steed=
}}
'''Argeleb I''' ({{TA|1226}}<ref>{{PM|Elendil}}, p. 194</ref> - {{TA|1356|n}},<ref name="North">{{App|North}}</ref> died aged 130) was the seventh king of [[Arthedain]], succeeding his father, [[Malvegil]], upon his death in 1349.

==History==
By the time Argeleb came to power, the line of kings had failed in the kingdoms of [[Cardolan]] and [[Rhudaur]], so Argeleb claimed sovereignty over all of [[Arnor]]<ref name="Eriador">{{App|Eriador}}</ref> (taking the royal prefix ''[[ar|ar(a)-]]'' as a token of this<ref>{{App|North}}, note 4</ref>).  He was thus not only the seventh King of [[Arthedain]], but also the seventeenth King of [[Arnor]]. Cardolan accepted this rule but Rhudaur resisted this claim, and a captain of the [[Hill-men]] of that land formed a secret alliance with Arnor's enemy, the [[Witch-king]] of [[Angmar]]. In response, Argeleb fortified the [[Weather Hills|hills]], but he was killed during battle with the two realms in {{TA|1356}}.<ref name="Eriador"/><ref>{{App|TA}}</ref> 

Argeleb ruled for only seven years, and was succeeded by his son, [[Arveleg I]], upon his death in {{TA|1356}}.<ref name="North"/>

== Etymology ==
''Argeleb'' is a [[Sindarin]] name.<ref name=GS>{{HM|GS}}, p. 342</ref><ref name=Tolkiendil>{{webcite|author=Association Tolkiendil|articleurl=https://www.tolkiendil.com/langues/english/i-lam_arth/compound_sindarin_names|articlename=Compound Sindarin Names in Middle-earth|website=Tolkiendil|accessed=03 February 2022}}</ref><ref name=Eldamo>{{webcite|author=Paul Strack|articleurl=https://www.eldamo.org/content/words/word-3417283821.html|articlename=S. ''Argeleb'' m.|website=Eldamo|accessed=08 March 2023}}</ref><ref>{{App|Elves}}, footnote after "''Eldarin'' form"</ref><ref>{{App|North}}, footnote after "Amlaith of Fornost"</ref><ref>{{PM|Elendil}}, manuscript C, The Heirs of Elendil, The Northern Line of Arnor: the Isildurioni, 10. Earendur, "used Elvish names of Noldorin form"</ref> Its meaning is not glossed. [[David Salo]] suggests it means "king of silver".<ref name=GS/> The Association Tolkiendil suggests it means "royal silver".<ref name=Tolkiendil/> David Salo, the Association Tolkiendil and Paul Strack suggests that it is a combination of ''[[ara|ar(a)-]]''<ref>{{App|North}}, footnote after "Malvegil 1349,"</ref> ("royal", "noble", "high") and a [[lenition|lenited]] form ''geleb'' of ''[[celeb]]'' ("silver").<ref name=GS/><ref name=Tolkiendil/><ref name=Eldamo/>

==Genealogy==
{{familytree/start}}
{{familytree | CEL |CEL=[[Celebrindor]]<br/><small>''{{TA|1062|n}} - {{TA|1272|n}}''</small>}}
{{familytree | |!| |}}
{{familytree | MAL |MAL=[[Malvegil]]<br/><small>''{{TA|1144|n}} - {{TA|1349|n}}''</small>}}
{{familytree | |!| |}}
{{familytree | ARG |ARG='''ARGELEB I'''<br/><small>''{{TA|1226|n}} - {{TA|1356|n}}''†</small>}}
{{familytree | |!| |}}
{{familytree | ARV |ARV=[[Arveleg I]]<br/><small>''{{TA|1309|n}} - {{TA|1409|n}}''†</small>}}
{{familytree | |!| |}}
{{familytree | ARA |ARA=[[Araphor]]<br/><small>''{{TA|1391|n}} - {{TA|1589|n}}''</small>}}
{{familytree/end}}

==Portrayal in adaptations==
'''2006: ''[[The Lord of the Rings: The Battle for Middle-earth II]]'':'''
:In the Angmar campaign of the [[The Lord of the Rings: The Battle for Middle-earth II: The Rise of the Witch-king|expansion pack ''The Rise of the Witch-king'']], Argeleb comes to the aid of the struggling kingdom of Rhudaur. He arrives from the North after the player destroys the first of two fortresses, and has to be defeated for the level to pass.

{{references}}
{{seq-start}}
{{seq-head
| race=arnorian
| house=[[House of Isildur]]<small><br/>Cadet branch of [[House of Elros]]</small>
| born={{TA|1226}}
| died={{TA|1356}}
}}
{{seq
| prow=2
| prev=[[Malvegil]]
| list=15th [[Heir of Isildur|Heir]] of [[Isildur]]
| dates={{TA|1349}} - {{TA|1356|n}}
| next=[[Arveleg I]]
| nrow=2
}}
{{seq
| list=7th [[Kings of Arthedain|King of Arthedain]]
| dates={{TA|1349}} - {{TA|1356|n}}
}}
{{seq-end}}

{{northernline}}

[[Category:House of Isildur]]
[[Category:Rulers of Arthedain]]
[[Category:Third Age characters]]
[[de:Argeleb I.]]
[[fr:encyclo/personnages/hommes/3a/dunedain/dunedain du nord/argeleb ier]]
[[fi:Argeleb I]]