{{disambig-two|the tenth [[Kings of Arthedain|King]] of [[Arthedain]]|seventh King|[[Argeleb I]]}}
{{infobox character
| people=[[Arnor]]ian
| name=Argeleb
| image=Argeleb II.jpg
| caption=Argeleb from ''[[Middle-earth Role Playing]]''
| pronun=
| othernames=
| titles=[[King of Arthedain]]
| position=
| location=[[Arthedain]]
| affiliation=
| language=[[Sindarin]], [[Westron]]
| birth={{TA|1473}}
| birthlocation=
| rule={{TA|1589}} - {{TA|1670|n}}
| death={{TA|1670}}
| deathlocation=
| age=197
| notablefor=
| house=[[House of Isildur]]
| parentage=[[Araphor]]
| siblings=
| spouse=
| children=[[Arvegil]]
| gender=Male
| height=
| hair=
| eyes=
| clothing=
| weapons=
| steed=
}}
'''Argeleb II''' ({{TA|1473}}<ref>{{PM|Elendil}}, p. 194</ref> - {{TA|1670|n}},<ref name="North">{{App|North}}</ref> died aged 197) was the tenth king of [[Arthedain]].
==History==
He succeeded his father, [[Araphor]], upon his death in 1589, at the age of 116. 

According to the records of [[Gondor]], Argeleb was the [[High King]] in {{TA|1601}} when many [[hobbits]] migrated from [[Bree]]; the King granted them permission to cross the [[Bridge of Stonebows]] and to settle the land beyond the [[Baranduin]] to dwell in. He demanded in return to acknowledge his lordship, keep all bridges and roads, and speed the royal messengers.<ref>{{FR|Hobbits}}</ref> These hobbits were joined in [[The Shire]] by [[Stoors]] from [[Dunland]] around  {{TA|1630|n}}.<ref name="TA">{{App|TA}}</ref> Prior to this, the area of the Shire had been unpopulated and regarded as the king's hunting ground.

In {{TA|1636}} the [[Great Plague]] devastated [[Gondor]] (the [[Kings of Gondor|King]] [[Telemnar]], his children and the [[White Tree of Gondor|White Tree]] perished) and moved north to the lands of Argeleb's rule.<ref name="TA"/>  Although the Great Plague decreased in severity as it moved north, there was still much suffering throughout [[Eriador]]. A remnant of the [[Dúnedain]] in Cardolan survived until the Great Plague of 1636; most of them perished, especially in [[Minhiriath]]. The [[last prince of Cardolan]] was buried in the [[Barrow-downs]]; in {{TA|1636}} evil spirits out of [[Angmar]] and [[Rhudaur]] entered into the deserted mounds and dwelt there.<ref>{{App|Eriador}}</ref><ref>{{HM|RC}}, "Fog on the Barrow-downs", pp. 144-5; Index, 'Cardolan, [[Last prince of Cardolan|last prince of]]'</ref>

After having ruled for eighty-one years, he was succeeded by his son, [[Arvegil]], upon his death in 1670.<ref name="North"/>

==Etymology==
See [[Argeleb I#Etymology|Argeleb I - Etymology]].

It is possible that Argeleb II was named after his great-grandfarther, [[Argeleb I]]

==Genealogy==
{{familytree/start}}
{{familytree | ARV |ARV=[[Arveleg I]]<br/><small>''{{TA|1309|n}} - {{TA|1409|n}}''†</small>}}
{{familytree | |!| |}}
{{familytree | ARA |ARA=[[Araphor]]<br/><small>''{{TA|1391|n}} - {{TA|1589|n}}''</small>}}
{{familytree | |!| |}}
{{familytree | ARG |ARG='''ARGELEB II'''<br/><small>''{{TA|1473|n}} - {{TA|1670|n}}''</small>}}
{{familytree | |!| |}}
{{familytree | ARV |ARV=[[Arvegil]]<br/><small>''{{TA|1553|n}} - {{TA|1743|n}}''</small>}}
{{familytree | |!| |}}
{{familytree | ARV |ARV=[[Arveleg II]]<br/><small>''{{TA|1633|n}} - {{TA|1813|n}}''</small>}}
{{familytree/end}}

{{references}}
{{seq-start}}
{{seq-head
| race=arnorian
| house=[[House of Isildur]]<small><br/>Cadet branch of [[House of Elros]]</small>
| born={{TA|1473}}
| died={{TA|1670}}
}}
{{seq
| prow=2
| prev=[[Araphor]]
| list=18th [[Heir of Isildur|Heir]] of [[Isildur]]
| dates={{TA|1589}} - {{TA|1670}}
| next=[[Arvegil]]
| nrow=2
}}
{{seq
| list=10th [[Kings of Arthedain|King of Arthedain]]
| dates={{TA|1589}} - {{TA|1670}}
}}
{{seq-end}}

{{northernline}}

[[Category:House of Isildur]]
[[Category:Rulers of Arthedain]]
[[Category:Third Age characters]]
[[de:Argeleb II.]]
[[fr:encyclo/personnages/hommes/3a/dunedain/dunedain du nord/argeleb ii]]
[[fi:Argeleb II]]