{{Adaptation}}
{{organization infobox
| name=Army of the Southern Dragon
| image=Angus McBride - Warlord's Challenge.jpg
| caption=“Warlord's Challenge” by [[Angus McBride]], depicting Warlord Sangarunya
| pronun=
| othernames=Army of the Burning Sun <small>(mutiny)</small>
| founded=Late Second Age
| founder=Wyatan
| purpose=Conquering the lands of the [[Yellow Mountains]]
| members=Wyatan, Utchû, Sangarunya
| location=[[Ny Chennacatt]]
| disbanded=
| notablefor=
}}In [[Middle-earth Role Playing]], the '''Army of the Southern Dragon''' was [[Fifth of the Nazgûl|Akhôrahil]]'s host, which operated from [[Ny Chennacatt]] and sought to subjugate the regions around the [[Yellow Mountains]]. It was first founded by Wyatan in the [[Second Age]], and was reestablished several times.<ref name="citadel">{{ICE|8205}}, pp. 17-18</ref> The army's sights weren't set on [[Sîrayn]], since it was considered largely under control during the time the army was active in the [[Third Age]].<ref name="gharad">{{ICE|3111}}, p. 25</ref>

The army's higher officers wore golden armour, and their red surcoats prominently displayed the black dragon, which was described as a Sand Drake or “Were-worm”. The same emblem was displayed on shields as well.<ref>{{ICE|3800}}, p. 55</ref>

==Formation==
At head is the Warlord ([[Languages in Middle-earth Role Playing#Tazinain|Ta.]] ''Alaqa''), the successor to Wyatan. Four generals, each representing a wind direction, report directly to him. Each Wind comprised a field-army with a specific responsibility. The West Wind, usually led directly by the Warlord, was focused on the conquest of [[Ciryatanor]] and [[Tulwang]]. The North Wind sought to to conquer [[Far Harad]] while the South Wind focused on the south of the Yellow Mountains. Finally, the East Wind's general was in charge of Ny Chennacatt's defence as its captain, and could even directly report to the Storm King or the citadel's lord if necessary.

The army's cavalry was its primary force, and consisted of elite warriors riding [[horses]] and [[camels]]. The infrantry was of secondary importance, and was considered much less prestigious, often performing menial labour. The Winds could also field up to 2000 [[Mûmakil]] as siege weapons.

The Army of the Southern Dragon could also call upon the orc legions of Ny Chennacatt and Fhûl, each numbering around ten thousand troops. While they were primarily used for labour and support roles, select companies were deployed as shock troops to disrupt enemy formations before the cavalry engaged.<ref name="citadel"/>

===Warlords===
====Wyatan====
Wyatan was born in [[Ciryatanor]] in {{SA|1899}}, as the son of a [[Númenórean]] sea captain. His sea-sickness caused him to receive much ridicule, and he instead focused on studying. Eventually he broke with his family and traveled to the capital. There he put his tactical mind to work by organizing raids of street gangs, and in adulthood bribed his way into prestigious jobs. He had become a palace guard by the time Akhôrahil influenced his father into taking his own life. The commander of the guard drew his weapon when Akhôrahil proclaimed himself king, but was cut down by Wyatan. This earned him the trust of his king, and he ended up as the commander of Ciryatanor's armies, which ultimately became the first Army of the Southern Dragon.<ref>{{ICE|8205}}, pp. 24-25</ref>

====Utchû====
Utchû was a [[Black Númenórean]] born in [[Mûmakan#Plains_and_hills|Dûshera]] in {{TA|1327}}. The son of a Prince, he lived in spoiled luxury until his younger brother surpassed him in skill and attempted to expose his laziness. Killing his brother in retaliation and being found out, Utchû had to flee.<ref name="Utchû>{{ICE|8205}}, pp. 23-24</ref> In {{TA|1367}}, he became the Warlord of the reestablished Army of the Southern Dragon.<ref>{{ICE|8205}}, p. 5</ref> After {{TA|1641}}, he wielded a lesser ring of power previously worn by [[Tartas Izain]].<ref name="Utchû/> After conquering Ciryatanor in {{TA|1802}}, he became its lord. In {{TA|1812}}, he renounced his liege and renames the forces with him to the Army of the Burning Sun. The Army of the Southern Dragon, now led by Sangarunya, attacked Utchû's capital in {{TA|1815}}, and he was slain.<ref name="timeline">{{ICE|8205}}, p. 6</ref>

====Sangarunya====
Sangarunya was an [[Umbar]]ean of Númenórean heritage. His father was a high priest of the [[Sauron|Dark Workship]], who was slain when that cult was persecuted, after which the family fled to [[Far Harad]]. When training as a warrior, he shared a unit with [[Pon Ivic]], with whom he came into conflict. His humiliation after losing a duel led him to joining the Army of the Southern Dragon to seek revenge. Moving to Ny Chennacatt, he quickly rose in rank.<ref>{{ICE|8205}}, pp. 22-23</ref> After Utchû's defection in {{TA|1812}}, he became the new Warlord.<ref name="timeline"/>

==History==
After Akhôrahil's orc forces were defeated in {{TA|1201}} due to its incompetent leadership, he reestablished the Army of the Southern Dragon a century later, with [[Haradrim]] warriors and a few Black Númenóreans.<ref name="gharad"/> It is noted that a division of troops in the hosts of [[Nurn]] during the [[Third Age]] originated from the elite of the Army of the Southern Dragon.<ref>{{ICE|3112}}, pp. 26</ref>
{{References}}

[[Category:Concepts from adaptations]]
[[Category:MERP]]