{{author infobox
| image=
| name=Arne Zettersten
| born=[[10 January]], [[1934]]
| died=[[21 September]], [[2015]]
| education=
| occupation=Academic, author
| location=
| website=
|}}
'''Arne Zettersten''' ([[1934]]-[[2015]]) was a Swedish professor emeritus. Before retirement, Zettersten was Head of Department and Professor in English at the University of Copenhagen.<ref>"Foreword", in ''Worlds of Words. A Tribute to Arne Zettersten. Nordic Journal of English Studies.'' Special Issue, Volume 3, No. 1 (2004; editor: Cay Dollerup).</ref>

In [[1965]], Zettersten presented his doctoral thesis on the [[AB language]], a medieval literary dialect first identified by [[J.R.R. Tolkien]]. And during the 1960s in [[Oxford]], Zettersten became a friend and colleague of Tolkien, as they both shared an interest in a certain collection of medieval manuscripts (the "[[wikipedia:Katherine Group|Katherine Group]]"). Their contact continued throughout the last 13 years of Tolkien's life. Arne Zettersten died 2015, aged 81. 

==Bibliography==
Selected bibliography of works concerned with J.R.R. Tolkien.
===Articles===
* [[1966]]: ''English Studies 47'' (Amsterdam)
** "J.R.R. Tolkien. The English Text of the Ancrene Riwle - Ancrene Wisse" (pp.&nbsp;290–292; [Review])
* [[2004]]: ''[[The Invented Worlds of J.R.R. Tolkien]]'' [also published in ''[[The Lord of the Rings 1954-2004|The Lord of the Rings 1954-2004: Scholarship in Honor of Richard E. Blackwelder]]'' (2006)]
** "The AB Language Lives"
* [[2006]]: ''[[J.R.R. Tolkien Encyclopedia: Scholarship and Critical Assessment]]'', entries:
** "AB Language"
** "Ancrene Wisse"
** "Katherine Group"
* [[2008]]: ''[[Lembas Extra: Proceedings of the 5th Unquendor Lustrum]]''
**  "Discussing language history with J.R.R. Tolkien"

===Books===
* [[2008]]: ''[[Tolkien - min vän Ronald och hans världar]]''
* [[2011]]: ''[[J.R.R. Tolkien's Double Worlds and Creative Process]]''

==External links==
* [http://universitypost.dk/article/obituary-arne-zettersten-1934-2015 Obituary at University of Copenhagen]
*[http://www.tolkienlibrary.com/press/963-Tolkien_Double_Worlds_Creative_Process.php Tolkien's Double Worlds and Creative Process by Arne Zettersten]

{{references}}
[[Category:Academics|Zettersten, Arne]]
[[Category:Authors|Zettersten, Arne]]
[[Category:JRRTE contributors|Zettersten, Arne]]
[[Category:Swedish people|Zettersten, Arne]]
[[Category:People by name|Zettersten, Arne]]