{{disambig-two|the eighth [[Kings of Arthedain|King]] of [[Arthedain]]|twelfth King|[[Arveleg II]]}}
{{infobox character
| people=[[Arnor]]ian
| name=Arveleg I
| image=Arveleg rotwk.jpg
| caption=Arveleg from ''[[The Lord of the Rings: The Battle for Middle-earth II: The Rise of the Witch-king|The Rise of the Witch-king]]''
| pronun=
| othernames=
| titles=[[King of Arthedain]]
| position=
| location=[[Arthedain]]
| affiliation=
| language=[[Sindarin]], [[Westron]]
| birth={{TA|1309}}
| birthlocation=
| rule={{TA|1356}} - {{TA|1409|n}}
| death={{TA|1409}}
| deathlocation=[[Fall of Amon Sûl]]
| age=100
| notablefor=
| house=[[House of Isildur]]
| parentage=[[Argeleb I]]
| siblings=
| spouse=
| children=[[Araphor]]
| gender=Male
| height=
| hair=
| eyes=
| clothing=
| weapons=
| steed=
}}
'''Arveleg I''' ({{TA|1309}}<ref>{{PM|Elendil}}, p. 194</ref> - {{TA|1409}}<ref>{{App|North}}</ref>) was the eighth king of [[Arthedain]], succeeding his father, [[Argeleb I]].

==History==
During his lifetime, the father of Arveleg, Argeleb son of [[Malvegil]], was the only King in Arnor that still had [[Isildur]]'s heritage. As such, he claimed lordship over [[Rhudaur]] and [[Cardolan]]. The men of Rhudaur resisted this claim, and a captain of the [[Hill-men]] of that land formed a secret alliance with Argeleb's enemy, the [[Witch-king]] of [[Angmar]]. Thus Arveleg grew up in an era of War. The armies of [[Angmar]] and Rhudaur laid siege to the [[Weather Hills]], and Argeleb fell. And so, in {{TA|1356}}, Arveleg became the eighth King of Arthedain.

With the help of the Dúnedain of Cardolan and the [[Elves of Lindon]], Arveleg managed to drive out the enemies from the Weather Hills. Arthedain and Cardolan kept a guarded border along the Weather Hills, the [[East Road]] and the lower [[Hoarwell]]. This defence was apparently effective, as Angmar shifted its attention to [[Rivendell]] instead. 

In {{TA|1409}}, the armies of Angmar and Rhudaur crossed the Hoarwell, occupied Cardolan, and closed in on Weathertop. In a bloody [[Fall of Amon Sûl|battle]], both Arveleg and the [[last prince of Cardolan]] were slain.<ref>{{HM|RC}}, "Fog on the Barrow-downs", pp. 144-5; Index, 'Cardolan, [[Last prince of Cardolan|last prince of]]'</ref> The [[Amon Sûl-stone|palantír]] of Amon Sûl could be saved, however, and was brought to the capital of Arthedain, [[Fornost Erain|Fornost]].

After his death, Arveleg was succeeded by his 18-year old son, [[Araphor]]. Though this was a young age for one of [[Númenóreans|Númenórean]] blood, he was valiant. With the help of the [[Círdan]] of Lindon, he repelled attacks on Fornost and the [[North Downs]].<ref>{{App|Eriador}}</ref>

== Etymology ==
''Arveleg'' is a [[Sindarin]] name.<ref name=GS>{{HM|GS}}, p. 342</ref><ref name=Tolkiendil>{{webcite|author=Association Tolkiendil|articleurl=https://www.tolkiendil.com/langues/english/i-lam_arth/compound_sindarin_names|articlename=Compound Sindarin Names in Middle-earth|website=Tolkiendil|accessed=03 February 2022}}</ref><ref name=Eldamo>{{webcite|author=Paul Strack|articleurl=https://www.eldamo.org/content/words/word-2530447817.html|articlename=S. ''Arveleg'' m.|website=Eldamo|accessed=08 March 2023}}</ref><ref>{{App|Elves}}, footnote after "''Eldarin'' form"</ref><ref>{{App|North}}, footnote after "Amlaith of Fornost"</ref><ref>{{PM|Elendil}}, manuscript C, The Heirs of Elendil, The Northern Line of Arnor: the Isildurioni, 10. Earendur, "used Elvish names of Noldorin form"</ref> Its meaning its not glossed, but [[David Salo]] and the Association Tolkiendil suggest that ''Arveleg'' means "Mighty King".<ref name=GS/><ref name=Tolkiendil/> David Salo, the Association Tolkiendil and Paul Strack suggests that it is a combination of ''[[ara|ar(a)-]]''<ref>{{App|North}}, footnote after "Malvegil 1349,"</ref> ("royal", "noble", "high") and a [[lenition|lenited]] form ''veleg'' of ''[[beleg]]'' ("mighty", "great").<ref name=GS/><ref name=Tolkiendil/><ref name=Eldamo/>

== Genealogy ==
{{familytree/start}}
{{familytree | MAL |MAL=[[Malvegil]]<br/><small>''{{TA|1144|n}} - {{TA|1349|n}}''</small>}}
{{familytree | |!| |}}
{{familytree | ARG |ARG=[[Argeleb I]]<br/><small>''{{TA|1226|n}} - {{TA|1356|n}}''†</small>}}
{{familytree | |!| |}}
{{familytree | ARV |ARV='''ARVELEG I'''<br/><small>''{{TA|1309|n}} - {{TA|1409|n}}''†</small>}}
{{familytree | |!| |}}
{{familytree | ARA |ARA=[[Araphor]]<br/><small>''{{TA|1391|n}} - {{TA|1589|n}}''</small>}}
{{familytree | |!| |}}
{{familytree | ARG |ARG=[[Argeleb II]]<br/><small>''{{TA|1473|n}} - {{TA|1670|n}}''</small>}}
{{familytree/end}}

==Portrayal in adaptations==
'''2006: ''[[The Lord of the Rings: The Battle for Middle-earth II]]'':'''
:The events surrounding Arveleg play a major role in the expansion pack, ''[[The Lord of the Rings: The Battle for Middle-earth II: The Rise of the Witch-king|The Rise of the Witch-king]]''. Arveleg, voiced by [[Cam Clarke]], is portrayed as using the [[Amon Sûl-stone|palantír of Amon Sûl]] to anticipate the Witch-king's plans. He survives the Fall of Amon Sûl and takes the palantír with him, but destroys it (and himself in the process) to prevent it from falling in the Witch-king's hands.

{{references}}
{{seq-start}}
{{seq-head
| race=arnorian
| house=[[House of Isildur]]<small><br/>Cadet branch of [[House of Elros]]</small>
| born={{TA|1309}}
| died={{TA|1409}}
}}
{{seq
| prow=2
| prev=[[Argeleb I]]
| list=16th [[Heir of Isildur|Heir]] of [[Isildur]]
| dates={{TA|1356}} - {{TA|1409|n}}
| next=[[Araphor]]
| nrow=2
}}
{{seq
| list=8th [[Kings of Arthedain|King of Arthedain]]
| dates={{TA|1356}} - {{TA|1409|n}}
}}
{{seq-end}}

{{northernline}}

[[Category:House of Isildur]]
[[Category:Rulers of Arthedain]]
[[Category:Third Age characters]]
[[de:Arveleg I.]]
[[fr:/encyclo/personnages/hommes/3a/dunedain/dunedain_du_nord/arveleg_ier]]
[[fi:Arveleg I]]