{{location infobox
| name=Ascar
| image=Christopher Tolkien - Ossiriand.jpg
| caption=
| pronun=
| othernames=[[Rathlóriel]]
| location=Between [[Thargelion]] and [[Ossiriand]]
| type=River
| description=
| regions=
| towns=
| inhabitants=
| created=
| destroyed=
| events=[[Battle of Sarn Athrad]]
}}
'''Ascar''' was the northernmost of the rivers that flowed through [[Ossiriand]]. It emerged near [[Dolmed]], and the [[Dwarf-road of Beleriand|Dwarf-road]] from the [[Blue Mountains]] lay along its northern bank, until it met [[Gelion]] at [[Sarn Athrad]].<ref>{{S|Map}}</ref> 
==History==
After the murder of King [[Thingol]] of Doriath the [[Dwarves of Nogrod]] easily entered [[Menegroth]] where they [[battle in the Thousand Caves|ransacked]] and plundered the halls, retaking the [[Nauglamír]]. The victorious Dwarves marched along the banks of the Ascar with their spoils.  Suddenly, [[Beren]], [[Dior]] his son, and a host of [[Green-elves|Laiquendi]] attacked the Dwarves.  After the [[Battle of Sarn Athrad]] Beren reclaimed the Nauglamír, but had the rest of the treasure of Doriath cast into the Ascar.  From that time forth the river was renamed [[Rathlóriel]] ("Goldenbed").<ref>{{S|Doriath}}</ref>

==Etymology==
''Asgar'' in [[Noldorin]] means "rushing" or "impetuous",<ref>{{S|Index}}, ''Ascar''</ref> derived from [[Sundocarme|root]] A-[[SKAR]].<ref>{{LR|Etymologies}}</ref>

In [[Ælfwine|Eriol's]] [[Old English]] translations, ''Ascar'' is referred to as ''Baening''. [[Christopher Tolkien]] tentatively interpreted the O.E. name as "river filled with bones (of the Dwarves)", but doubted that it was his father's intended meaning.<ref>{{SM|QA1}}</ref>

The name ''Rathlóriel'' means "Golden-bed".<ref>{{S|Index}}</ref> In the ''[[The Etymologies|Etymologies]]'', the name ''Rath Loriel'' is said to contain the [[Noldorin]] word ''[[Rath#Noldorin|rath]]'' ("coarse, river-bed") and ''[[glaur|lor-]]'' ("gold").<ref>{{LR|Etymologies}}, pp. 368, 383</ref><ref>{{VT|46a}}, p. 11</ref>

In the early drafts of ''[[The Silmarillion]]'', ''Rathlóriel'' was called ''Rathlorion''. However, Tolkien considered in later writings changing the name of the river to ''Rathmalad''<ref>{{WJ|11}}, pp.185, 191</ref>, "hastily pencilled" beneath ''Rathloriel'' on the [[The Second 'Silmarillion' Map]], and also ''Rathmallen''<ref>{{WJ|11}}, p.353</ref> which appears only in the text ''The Tale of Years'' (entry "[[First Age 503|503]]").

{{references}}
{{ossiriandrivers}}
[[Category:Rivers of Beleriand]]
[[Category:Sindarin locations]]

[[de:Ascar]]
[[fr:encyclo/geographie/eaux/beleriand/ascar]]
[[fr:encyclo/geographie/eaux/beleriand/rathloriel]]
[[fi:Ascar]]
[[fi:Rathlóriel]]