{{unnamed}}

The '''assaults on [[Lothlórien]]''' were a series of conflicts in [[March]] {{TA|3019}} initiated by [[Sauron]] against the realm during the [[War of the Ring]].

All attempts by Sauron’s armies failed. Besides the valour of the [[Galadhrim]], the realm was so powerful that it could have only been overcome by Sauron himself.<ref name=great/>

==Prelude==
In the years leading to the War of the Ring, [[Dol Guldur]] had become active<ref>{{App|TA}}</ref> (possibly under the power of [[Khamûl]], its former commander).<ref>{{UT|Hunt}}, p. 352, note 1</ref>

Escaping from [[Moria]], the [[Fellowship of the Ring]] arrived at Lothlórien, [[Ring-bearer|bringing]] the [[One Ring]]. Soon after, a band of hundred [[Orcs]] (presumably [[Orcs of the Misty Mountains]] pursuing them) crossed the [[Nimrodel (river)|Nimrodel]]. The wardens used feigned voices and led them into a trap, where a regiment or so of the [[Galadhrim]] were sent out, and destroyed them.<ref>{{FR|Lorien}}, pp. 345-6</ref>

But the coming of [[the One Ring]] and the orc pursuers were only the heralds of greater conflicts that were to occur. [[Sauron]] unleashed attacks on the Galadhrim.

==Assaults==
On [[11 March]], forces from [[Dol Guldur]] swarmed into the forest in a full-scale assault and were held back by the power of the Wood-elves.<ref name=great/> This was noticed by [[Frodo Baggins]], who saw smoke raising from Lórien's border, for he was wearing [[the One Ring]] at the [[Seat of Seeing]].<ref>{{FR|II10}}, p. 400</ref>

On [[15 March]], there was a [[Battle of the Pelennor Fields|big battle outside Minas Tirith]]. At the same time forces from Dol Guldur [[Battle under the trees|invaded Mirkwood]] and once more attacked Lothlórien.<ref name=great/>

The third and last attack was made seven days later, on [[22 March]]. They caused much destruction on the wood's borders, but the valiant Galadhrim routed them utterly, and the realm remained safe for the following days until the passing of Sauron.<ref name=great>{{App|Great}}, pp. 1093-4</ref>

==Aftermath==
In [[28 March]],<ref>{{App|B4}}, p. 1095</ref> after the [[Shadow]] of Sauron was lifted, Celeborn led the hosts of the [[Galadhrim]] across the [[Anduin]], and they stormed [[Dol Guldur]] and cleansed [[Mirkwood]]; [[Thranduil]] gave its southern part into the dominion of Lothlórien, and it was called [[East Lórien]].<ref name=great/>

{{wotr}}

{{references}}

[[Category:Conflicts of the War of the Ring]]