{{location infobox
| name=Avallónë
| image=Frédéric Bennett - Haven of the Eldar.jpg
| caption="Haven of the Eldar" by Frédéric Bennett
| pronun=
| othernames=Haven of the Eldar<ref>{{App|Numenor}}</ref>
| location=Eastern shore of [[Tol Eressëa]]
| type=City and port
| description=Island port with a great tower and harbour
| regions=
| towns=
| inhabitants=[[Eldar]]
| created=
| destroyed=
| events=
}}
'''Avallónë''' was a city and seaport on the eastern shore of the island of [[Tol Eressëa]]. Its name indicated that it was the city nearest to [[Valinor]] and the tower of Avallónë was the first sight that a mariner beheld as he approached the [[Undying Lands]]. The city was described as white-shining with a great harbour with lamplit quays.<ref name="Akallabeth">{{S|Akallabeth}}</ref> It had a tower where the [[Master-stone]] abode. 
 	
==History==
After the [[War of Wrath]] and the downfall of [[Morgoth]] the [[Valar]] summoned the [[Eldar]] to return to the West. Not all obeyed this new summons but those who did dwelt on Tol Eressëa.
 
In the [[Second Age]] some of the Men of [[Númenor]], those most far-sighted, could see Avallónë from the summit of the [[Meneltarma]] or from a tall ship that lay off the western coast as far as was lawful to go. Some thought this far off vision was of Valinor itself but the wise knew it was but Avallónë. While the [[Númenóreans]] respected the [[Ban of the Valar]] many elves would sail to Númenor; they brought birds, flower, and herbs to the land.
 
The sight of Avallónë beyond their reach helped to kindle resentment in the hearts of the Númenóreans against the Ban. As the people of the island turned against the Valar the visits of the Eldar became few and only made in secret to the [[Faithful]]. By the reign of [[Tar-Palantir]] the city of Avallónë was veiled in cloud.<ref name="Akallabeth"/>
 
After the [[Downfall of Númenor]], the island of Tol Eressëa with Avallónë and the Undying Lands beyond were removed from the world. Yet in the towers of the [[Emyn Beraid]] was kept the [[Elostirion-stone|Palantir of Elostirion]], which allowed the Elves to see the Tower of Avallónë, where the [[Master-stone]] abode.<ref>{{S|Rings}}</ref>

==Etymology==
''Avallónë'' seems to be a compound of ''[[ava]]'' ("outer") and ''lónë'' ("island"),<ref name=Avallone>{{webcite|author=Paul Strack|articleurl=http://eldamo.org/content/words/word-3289261925.html|articlename=Q. ''Avallóne'' loc.|website=[http://eldamo.org/index.html Eldamo - An Elvish Lexicon]|accessed=26 September 2019}}</ref> as in ''[[The Etymologies]]'' the Middle-Quenya ''Avalóna'' is given that meaning.<ref>{{LR|P3}}, p. 370, entry "LONO-"</ref>

==Other versions of the legendarium==
The name ''Avalon'' is given for first time to [[Tol Eressea]] in the [[The Fall of Númenor (chapter)#The second version of The Fall of N.C3.BAmenor|second version of The Fall of Númenor]], and it was so named "for it is hard by Valinor", so perhaps it included an abbreviation of ''Valinor''. In later texts a main city of Tol Eressëa is named ''Avallon(de)'' ("Haven of the Gods"),<ref>{{SD|3ii}}, p. 344</ref> probably containing the elements ''Vala'' (or their [[Adûnaic]] name ''Avalô'').<ref name=Avallone />

In [[The Later Quenta Silmarillion|The later ''Quenta Silmarillion'']], the name appeared as ''Avallónë'' in a footnote, again as a name of Tol Eressëa "signifying the isle that lies nighest unto the Valar in Valinor".<ref>{{MR|P3I5}}, p. 175</ref> However, the texts used by Christopher for his ''[[Silmarillion]]'' were those that corrected Avallónë as a city of the Isle.<ref>{{PM|V}}, p. 146-147</ref>

==Inspiration==
In [[Letter to Milton Waldman|a letter to Milton Waldman]], [[J.R.R. Tolkien|Tolkien]] states that [[Frodo Baggins|Frodo]] and [[Bilbo Baggins|Bilbo]] were given an "Arthurian ending".<ref>{{SD|Epilogue}}, p. 132</ref> It has been suggested by [[Wayne G. Hammond|Hammond]] and [[Christina Scull|Scull]] that Tolkien was emphasising this connection in the name Avallónë, echoing the island of [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Avalon Avalon] that [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/King_Arthur King Arthur] goes to in order to recover from his wounds.<ref>{{HM|RC}}, p. 677</ref>

{{references}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:Avallone}}
[[Category:Cities, towns and villages]]
[[Category:Quenya locations]]
[[Category:Tol Eressëa]]
[[de:Avallóne]]
[[fi:Avallónë]]
[[fr:encyclo/geographie/villes tours et forteresses/tol eressea/avallone]]