{{stub}}
{{title}}
{{scene
| name = Balin's Tomb
| film = [[The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring]]
| image = The Lord of the Rings - The Fellowship of the Ring - Chamber of Mazarbul2.jpg
| number = 29 (theatrical)<br>
           35 (extended)
| duration =
| event =
| characters = [[Frodo Baggins|Frodo]], [[Gandalf]], [[Aragorn]], [[Legolas]], [[Gimli]], [[Boromir]], [[Samwise Gamgee|Sam]], [[Meriadoc Brandybuck|Merry]], [[Peregrin Took|Pippin]]
| previous = [[A Journey in the Dark (scene)|A Journey in the Dark]]
| next = [[The Bridge of Khazad-dûm (scene)|The Bridge of Khazad-dûm]]
}}
'''Balin's Tomb''' is the twenty-ninth scene of ''[[The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring]]'' and the thirty-fifth of [[The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring (extended edition)|''The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring'' (extended edition)]]. This scene was extended in the latter edition.

==Synopsis==
As the journey through [[Moria]] continues, [[Gimli]] suddenly sees something that makes him run off ahead. The rest of the [[Fellowship of the Ring|Fellowship]] follows, to find Gimli kneeling and weeping before a sarcophagus. [[Gandalf]] reads the inscription: "Here lies [[Balin]], son of [[Fundin]], Lord of Moria." Handing his hat and his staff to [[Peregrin Took|Pippin]], he retrieves an old tome and begins to read it.

{{Quote|They have taken the bridge and the second hall. We have barred the gates, but cannot hold them for long. The ground shakes. Drums... drums in the deep. We cannot get out. A Shadow moves in the dark. We cannot get out. They are coming.}}

Pippin suddenly touches one of the dwarf skeletons, which tumbles into the well its sitting on, making a loud racket. Everyone cringes and braces themselves as the loud clanging echoes throughout the mines, but nothing seems to happen. An annoyed Gandalf takes his hat and staff back from Pippin and chastises him, but goes silent as drums begin beating.

[[Sting]] suddenly begins glowing blue, making [[Samwise Gamgee|Sam]] and [[Frodo Baggins|Frodo]] realize that orcs are approaching. [[Boromir]] quickly tries to shut the doors to the tomb, but is nearly hit by two orc arrows. The Fellowship prepares for battle, Boromir sarcastically noting that they have a [[cave-trolls|Cave Troll]]. [[Legolas]] throws them axes to bar the door, and then they draw back, with everyone drawing their weapons for battle. Gimli growls, declaring boldly that there's still one dwarf in Moria that draws breath.

The orcs soon break through the door, and the battle begins. The Fellowship holds their own, but the sudden entrance of the Cave-Troll turns the tide. During the fight, Frodo is seemingly skewered by a spear from the Cave-Troll, which is soon slain by the Fellowship. Frodo is revealed to be unharmed, having been saved by the [[Mithril-coat]] given to him by [[Bilbo Baggins|Bilbo]].

Hearing more orcs approaching, Gandalf quickly orders everyone to flee to the [[Bridge of Khazad-dûm]], but they don't get far before they are completely surrounded by orcs. A sudden growl in the distance terrorizes the orcs, and they scurry away. Gandalf realizes a [[Balrog]] is approaching, and quickly orders everyone to run.

[[Category:The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring scenes|35]]