{{Unnamed}}
{{organization infobox
| name=Barahir's outlaws
| image = Ted Nasmith - At Tarn Aeluin.jpg
| caption="At Tarn Aeluin" by [[Ted Nasmith]]
| pronun=
| othernames=
| founded=c. {{FA|455}}
| founder=[[Barahir]]
| purpose=Opposing [[Morgoth]] in [[Dorthonion]]
| members=[[Beren]], eleven others
| location=[[Dorthonion]]
| disbanded={{FA|460}}
| notablefor=
}}

{{quote|But still there lived in hiding cold<br>undaunted, Barahir the bold<br>of [[Ladros|land bereaved]], of lordship shorn<br>who once a prince of Men was born<br>and now an outlaw lurked and lay<br>in the [[Taur-nu-Fuin (Dorthonion)|hard heath and woodland gray]]<br>and with him clung his faithful men<br>but [[Beren]] his son and other ten.|''[[Lay of Leithian]]'', [[Lay of Leithian Canto II|Canto II]], vv. 127-140}}

'''Barahir's outlaws''' were a group of survivors of the sack of [[Dorthonion]] who remained loyal to the exiled [[Barahir]], [[Lord of Ladros]]. Aside from Barahir's son [[Beren]], they numbered either ten (as stated in the initial version of the Lay of Leithian, quoted above) or eleven (as stated in the revised later version known as the Lay of Leithian Recommenced, quoted below, which gives the names of all eleven).  They were betrayed by [[Gorlim]], one of their number, in the year {{FA|460}}.

==History==
During the [[Dagor Bragollach]], in the year {{FA|455}}, [[Bregolas]], the [[Lord of Ladros]], was killed and [[Dorthonion]] overrun. His brother [[Barahir]] "the Bold" escaped the destruction of their lands with his son [[Beren]] and a number of companions. He refused to desert the land owned by his fathers, and lived as an outlaw, during which time the servants of [[Morgoth]] whittled his band down to only twelve, not counting himself, as discussed above.<ref name="OBaL">[[J.R.R. Tolkien]], [[Christopher Tolkien]] (ed.), ''[[The Silmarillion]]'', "[[Of Beren and Lúthien]]"</ref>

The surviving companions are named in the ''[[Lay of Leithian]]'' thus:

{{blockquote|Twelve men beside him still there went,<br>still faithful when all hope was spent.<br>Their names are yet in elven-song<br>remembered, though the years are long<br>since doughty [[Dagnir]] and [[Ragnor]],<br>[[Radhruin]], [[Dairuin]], and [[Gildor (outlaw)|Gildor]],<br>[[Gorlim|Gorlim Unhappy]], and [[Urthel]],<br>and [[Arthad]] and [[Hathaldir]] fell;<br>since the black shaft with venomed wound<br>took [[Belegund]] and [[Baragund]],<br>the mighty sons of [[Bregolas]];<br>since he whose doom and deeds surpass<br>all tales of [[Men]] was laid on bier,<br>fair [[Beren|Beren son of Barahir]].|''[[The Lay of Leithian Recommenced]]'', Canto I, vv. 145-152}}

They made camp in the hidden lake, [[Tarn Aeluin]], and lived in hiding until 460, when Gorlim "the Unhappy" was tricked by [[Sauron]] into thinking that his wife [[Eilinel]] was still alive. In a vain attempt to save her life he went to the dark servant of Morgoth and betrayed the location of Barahir's camp in return for a promise that he and she would be united and set free. Sauron accepted this information gratefully, and then slew Gorlim, revealing that he had tricked him and Eilinel was dead in truth.<ref name="OBaL"/>

Sauron's [[orcs]] entered into Tarn Aeluin and [[Massacre of Tarn Aeluin|slew all they found]], including Barahir. Only Beren escaped the slaughter, for he was out hunting at the time, and, warned by the ghost of Gorlim, returned to find his father and companions all dead. Soon after he fled Dorthonion forever, and it came utterly into darkness.<ref name="OBaL"/>

== Other versions of the legendarium ==
The account found in ''[[The Silmarillion]]'' closely parallels that told in full by the ''[[Lay of Leithian]]''.

In one manuscript in ''[[The Lays of Beleriand]]'', Tolkien used the term "'''XII Bëorings'''" in a header.<ref name=name>{{LB|4}}, pp. 335, 348, 351</ref> It is not known why Tolkien used the name "XII Bëorings" at that time. The term might be shorthand for the "twelve Bëorings", or a "translation" of an in-universe term, or it might just be an out-of-universe identifying term as a header.

{{Outlaws}}
{{references}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:Barahirs outlaws}}
[[Category:Folk of Bëor]]
[[Category:House of Bëor]]
[[Category:Organizations]]