{{people infobox
| name=Bardings
| image = Barding.jpg
| caption=
| pronun=
| othernames=
| origin=[[Men of Dale]] and possibly the [[Lake-men]]
| location=[[Dale]]
| affiliation=
| rivalry=
| language=[[language of Dale]], [[Westron]]
| members=[[Bard]], [[Bain]], [[Brand]], [[Bard II]]
| lifespan=
| distinctions=
| height=
| hair=
| skin=
| clothing=
| weapons=
}}
'''Bardings''' were the [[Men of Dale|people]] of the kingdom of [[Dale]] during the later [[Third Age]].<ref name=meet>{{FR|II1}}</ref> They took their name from [[Bard]] the Bowman, the first [[King of Dale]], descendant of Lord [[Girion]].

==History==
The people of the Bardings belonged to that wide-ranging branch of [[Men]] known as the [[Northmen]], and were thus kin to both the [[Beornings]] and the [[Rohirrim]].<ref>{{TT|Riders}}</ref> 

After [[Bard]]'s revenge on the Dragon in {{TA|2941}}, he became [[King of Dale]] in his own right. He was succeeded as its ruler by his son [[Bain]], and so his line extended down to the time of the [[War of the Ring]] and beyond.

The Bardings occupied the area between the [[Long Lake]] and [[Erebor]],<ref>{{HM|AoL}}, Fig. 157 (p. 200). The name "Bardings" appears on a "later map of Middle-earth". The name is written in red ink, like "[[Beornings]]" or "[[wood-elves]]", between "Long Lake" and "Erebor The Lonely Mt.".</ref> and maintained the friendship with the [[Dwarves of Erebor]], like their ancestors. As time passed, so the lands under the power of the Bardings grew, and in the time of [[Bard]]'s grandson [[Brand]] their territories were said to extend far to the south and east of the [[Long Lake]].<ref name=meet/> 

During the War of the Ring, the [[Easterlings]] [[Battle of Dale|attacked]] the town of Dale and forced the Men and the Dwarves into [[Lonely Mountain|Erebor]]; King Brand died alongside [[Dáin Ironfoot]] at the [[Front Gate]] of Erebor. After seven days of siege, news came of the defeat of [[Sauron]]. The new kings broke the siege and chased the Easterlings out of Dale. After the siege, the two peoples rebuilt Dale. The new King [[Bard II]] also sent an emissary to the coronation of King Elessar.<ref>{{App|B}}</ref>

==Etymology==
*''[[Bard#Etymology|bard]]'' + ''[[-ings]]''

{{references}}

[[Category:Bardings]]
[[Category:Demonyms]]
[[Category:Northmen]]
[[fi:Bardilaiset]]