{{battle
| image = Steamey - Death of Naugladur.jpg
| name=Battle of Sarn Athrad
| conflict=
| date={{FA|503}}
| place=[[Sarn Athrad]] and the slopes of the [[Blue Mountains]]
| result=Victory for the Elves of Ossiriand
*Recovery of the [[Nauglamír]]
*Complete destruction of the Dwarven host
*Dior succeeds his grandfather [[Thingol]] as [[King of Doriath]]
| side1=[[Laiquendi]]<br />
[[Ents]]
| side2=[[Dwarves of Nogrod]]
| commanders1=[[Beren|Beren Erchamion]]<br />
[[Dior]]
| commanders2=[[Lord of Nogrod]]<ref group="note">In Tolkien’s earlier writings it was [[Naugladur]]. In ''The Silmarillion'' he is unnamed.</ref> †
| forces1=Unknown
| forces2=Unknown, but was depleted heavily from their last [[battle in the Thousand Caves]]
| casual1=Light
| casual2=Completely destroyed<ref name="Ruin">{{S|Doriath}}</ref>
}}
The '''Battle of Sarn Athrad''' was a battle fought on {{FA|503}} between the [[Dwarves of Nogrod]] and [[Elves]] of [[Ossiriand]] led by [[Beren]]. The battle occurred after a [[battle in the Thousand Caves]] and the sack of [[Menegroth]] by the Dwarves.

==Background==
{{main|battle in the Thousand Caves}}
In {{FA|502}}<ref name="Tale">{{WJ|Years}}, p. 346</ref> King [[Thingol]] of [[Doriath]] had asked Dwarves from [[Nogrod]] to remake the [[Nauglamír]] and set in it the [[Silmaril]] he had received from [[Beren]]. Dwarven craftsmen from Nogrod performed this task but in secret, and they were determined to possess the finished work and carry it off to their mountain home. When Thingol was ready to place the completed necklace about his neck, the Dwarves challenged his right to own it. He haughtily rebuked them, and they slew the Thingol in retaliation. The Dwarves took the necklace and fled eastward but were pursued by the [[Iathrim]]. The [[Sindar]] managed to slay all but two of the Dwarves and reclaim the Nauglamír, and it was brought back to Queen [[Melian]]. However, the two Dwarves who escaped went to Nogrod and spread a false tale that Thingol had had the Dwarves killed in Doriath to cheat them of their reward for fashioning the necklace.
 
The wrath of the Dwarves was kindled by the false report and they long plotted their vengeance.  Aid was sought from the Dwarves of [[Belegost]] but they refused and tried to dissuade the Dwarves of Nogrod from their purpose.<ref name="Ruin">{{S|Doriath}}</ref> Their attempt did not avail, and in {{FA|503}}<ref name="Tale" /> Nogrod issued a great host that marched on Doriath. In the meantime, the grieving Melian left [[Middle-earth]], which withdrew the [[Girdle of Melian]] that had long protected the realm. There was thus no hindrance when the Dwarves swept into Menegroth, fought and killed many Elves, and took the Nauglamír and other plunder.<ref name="Ruin" />

==History==
===Prelude===
Word of the host of Dwarves in war gear heading west had come to Beren and [[Lúthien]], then dwelling on [[Tol Galen]]. Soon a messenger from Doriath came and revealed what had befallen. Beren, his son [[Dior]], and a host of [[Green-elves]] of [[Ossiriand]] journeyed swiftly north to the river [[Ascar]], which emptied into the [[Gelion]] near the [[Dwarf-road]] crossing at [[Sarn Athrad]].<ref name="Ruin" />

===Battle===
Unaware of any peril, the reduced host of Dwarves burdened with the spoils of Doriath entered the ford. As they climbed up Gelion's banks the air filled with the sound of elven-horns and the shafts of arrows. Beren slew the Lord of Nogrod<ref>{{LT2|IV}}, p.225</ref> and took from him the Nauglamír. Although most of the Dwarves were killed in the ford, some escaped and fled towards the mountains. However, as they climbed the slopes of [[Mount Dolmed]], [[Ents]] came forth and drove the Dwarves into the forest, from which none escaped.<ref name="Ruin" />
 
===Aftermath===
This was Beren's last battle. As the Lord of Nogrod was dying he cursed all of the treasure taken from Doriath. Beren took the [[Nauglamír]], washed it of blood, and took it back to Tol Galen for [[Lúthien]]. The rest of the treasure though was cast into the [[Ascar]], which from then on carried the named [[Rathlóriel]], the Goldenbed. Dior left his parents and took up the kingship in Doriath. After his parents died the recovered Nauglamír came to Dior. Eventually, news of the necklace and its Silmaril came to the sons of [[Fëanor]] who [[Second Kinslaying|assaulted]] and destroyed Doriath.<ref name="Ruin" />

==Other versions of the legendarium==
An early version of the battle is told in the ''[[The Nauglafring|Tale of the Nauglafring]]''.<ref>{{LT2|IV}}</ref> Both versions play out similarly however there is more importance to the characters Beren and the Dwarven king [[Naugladur]]. The latter offers the [[Nauglamír|Nauglafring]] in exchange for leaving unharmed but Beren rejects and they have a personal duel that is said to last three hours.

The prelude of the battle plays out differently as well. Beren was given news of what had befallen in Menegroth from [[Huan]]<ref group="note">[[Melian|Gwendelin]] was considered to have informed Beren instead but this idea was rejected.</ref> and he led a host of Elves to meet the Dwarves. Meanwhile [[Ufedhin]] who was one of the main instigators of the death of [[Thingol|Tinwelint]] and sack of Menegroth was captured by Beren’s rangers. Ufedhin had recently fled the camp of the Dwarf host that was returning to Nogrod and feigning to be from [[Artanor]] gave information about the array of the Dwarves to Beren. From this new knowledge Beren decided to halt his pursuit of the Dwarves and move swiftly to intercept them at the crossing of the river [[Aros]].

In later writings Tolkien changed who was ambushing the Dwarves from Beren to Celegorm and Curufin.<ref name="TTY">{{WJ|V}}</ref> In [[The Tale of Years (The War of the Jewels)|The Tale of Years]] it documents the many revisions that Tolkien made for the event, the first notable entry being:
{{blockquote|503. Birth of Earendil in Gondolin.<br>The Dwarves invade Doriath. Thingol is slain and his realm ended. Melian takes Nauglamir to Beren and Luthien and then returns to Valinor. Celegorm and Curufin destroy the Dwarf-host at Sarn-athrad in Rath-loriel; and are wroth to find the Silmaril not there. Dior goes to Doriath.|{{WJ|V}}}}
Christopher noted that this was a major change to the story which has remained the same in all versions.<ref name="TTY" /> The latest version of The Tales of Years written in typescript the entry goes:
{{blockquote|503. The Dwarves of Belegost and Nogrod invade Doriath. King Elu Thingol is slain and his realm ended. Melian escapes and carries away the Nauglamir and the Silmaril, and brings them to Beren and Luthien. She then forsook Middle-earth and returned to Valinor.<br>Curufin and Celegorm, hearing of the sack of Menegroth, ambushed the Dwarves at the Fords of Ascar as they sought to carry off the [[Dragon-gold]] to the mountains. The Dwarves were defeated with great loss, but they cast the gold into the river, which was therefore after named Rathloriel. Great was the anger of the sons of Feanor to discover that the Silmaril was not with the Dwarves; but they dared not to assail Luthien. Dior goes to Doriath and endeavours to recover the realm of Thingol.|{{WJ|V}}}}
Ultimately Christopher settled with the earlier versions of Beren ambushing the Dwarves when piecing together the complicated story of the Ruin of Doriath for ''The Silmarillion''.<ref name="TTY" />

Tolkien explained in [[Letter 247]] that after Beren's return from the dead, he only showed himself once more among the mortals. And that was to intercept the dwarf-army that had sacked the realm of Doriath and had slain King Thingol, carrying off the treasury, including the Silmaril. On the participation of the Ents, who aided Beren against the Dwarves, he wrote, "Beren, who had no army, received the aid of the Ents - and that would not make for love between Ents and Dwarves."<ref>{{L|247}}</ref>

{{references|n}}
[[Category:Conflicts in The Book of Lost Tales]]
[[Category:Conflicts of the First Age]]
[[fr:encyclo:evenements:1a:guerres:bataille de sarn athrad]]