{{battle
| image=
| name=Battle of the Camp
| conflict=Battle of the Camp
| date={{TA|1944}}
| place=Northern Ithilien
| result= Decisive Gondorian victory
| side1=[[Gondor]]
| side2=[[Easterlings]] and [[Haradrim]]
| commanders1=
*[[Eärnil II|Eärnil]]
| commanders2=
Unknown Easterling commanders
| forces1= 
| forces2=
| casual1=
| casual2=
}}

The '''Battle of the Camp''' was a battle fought in [[Dagorlad]] between [[Eärnil II|Eärnil]] of [[Gondor]] and the northern coalition of [[Wainriders]] after the [[Disaster of the Morannon]].

==Events Prior to the Battle==
In {{TA|1944}}, [[Wainriders]] from [[Rhûn]] made an alliance with the [[Haradrim]], and a dual attack on [[Ithilien]] was launched. While the Wainriders assaulted Ithilien from the north, the armies of the Haradrim crossed the [[Poros]] and invaded [[South Ithilien]]. 

The northern assault of the Wainriders was met by the King of [[Gondor]] himself, [[Ondoher]], with his two sons [[Artamir]] and [[Faramir (son of Ondoher)|Faramir]]. The Easterlings swept through Gondor's defence, cutting down the King and his heirs and routing his army. Their victory complete and the Northern Army of Gondor in retreat, the Wainriders paused in North Ithilien to celebrate their conquest.

The Haradrim in the south had met with much less success. The Gondorian Captain [[Eärnil II|Eärnil]] had led Gondor's inferior Southern Army to victory over the Haradrim, destroying their army in South Ithilien, to the north of the Poros. After his victory, Eärnil turned north.<ref name=AppA>{{App|A1iv}}, p. 1049-50</ref>

==The Battle==
The feasting [[Wainriders]] suddenly found their success reversed as Eärnil appeared with his Southern Army, reinforced by fleeing members of Ondoher's defeated northern troops. Eärnil's army descended on the camp of the unprepared Wainriders, burning their wains and driving many of them into the swamplands of the [[Dead Marshes]].<ref name=AppA/>  The battle was named after where it had taken place: the Battle of the Camp.<ref>{{App|TA}}, p. 1086</ref>

==Aftermath==
Because there was no heir apparent to the throne, Ondoher and his sons having been killed in the battle, Eärnil was crowned by [[Pelendur]], the current Steward of Gondor (even though [[Arvedui]] of [[Arthedain]] had attempted to claim the crown and was rejected). Eärnil was a distant relative of Ondoher, and could trace his lineage back to [[Elendil]] and [[Anárion]] of old.<ref name=AppA/> The Easterlings, for so long a dreaded enemy of Gondor, did not march against Gondor for hundreds of years afterwards.

{{References}}

[[Category:Conflicts of the Third Age]]
[[de:Schlacht des Lagers]]
[[fi:Leirin Taistelu]]