{{battle
| image = Ted Nasmith - Túrin Bears Gwindor to Safety.jpg
| name=Battle of Tumhalad
| conflict=[[Wars of Beleriand]]
|date={{FA|495}}<ref>{{GA|275}}</ref>
| place=[[Tumhalad]]
| result=Victory for [[Morgoth]]
| side1=[[Elves of Nargothrond]]
| side2=Forces of Morgoth
| commanders1=[[Orodreth]] †<br />
[[Túrin]]<br />
[[Gwindor]] †
| commanders2=[[Glaurung]]
| forces1=Unknown
| forces2=Greater than the Elves<ref>{{CH|11}}, pp. 176 'But greater far was the host of Morgoth than any scouts had told'</ref>
| casual1=Complete destruction of the host, few survivors
| casual2=Unknown
}}
{{quote|On that day all the pride and host of [[Nargothrond]] withered away.|''[[The Silmarillion]]'', [[Of Túrin Turambar]] }} 


The '''Battle of Tumhalad''' was the last battle of the Elves of [[Nargothrond]] against the Forces of Morgoth. It was fought on the plain of [[Tumhalad]] between the [[Narog]] and its tributary, the [[Ginglith]]. The defeat in this battle derived directly into the [[Fall of Nargothrond]].

==Background==
Nargothrond was the hidden stronghold of [[Finrod Felagund]], who built it as a safe haven for the Noldor against the forces of [[Morgoth]]. [[Túrin]] was led there by [[Gwindor]], a lord of Nargothrond, and during his stay there Túrin becoming mighty among the Elves and grew in favour with King [[Orodreth]], becoming his chief counsellor and ruling all matters of war. Túrin had no liking for their manner of warfare of stealth and ambush,<ref name="OTT">{{S|21}}</ref> preferring battle in the open. He caused the Noldor to build a mighty [[Bridge of Nargothrond|bridge over the Narog]] for swifter passage. A great store of weapons were made and the Elves forsook their secrecy and went into open war.

==History==
===Prelude===
Five years after the arrival of Túrin in Nargothrond, they were visited by [[Gelmir (messenger of Círdan)|Gelmir]] and [[Arminas]] of the people of [[Finarfin]] who had dwelt with [[Angrod]]. They gave warning of a great gathering of Orcs about [[Tol-in-Gaurhoth|Sauron's Isle]]<ref name="FALL">{{CH|11}}</ref> and a message from the [[Valar|Vala]] [[Ulmo]] to shut their [[Doors of Felagund|doors]] and go not abroad. Túrin rebuffed the Vala's warning and kept fighting against the Orcs.

In the same year, the hosts of Morgoth had defeated [[Handir]] and the [[Men of Brethil]], causing them to retreat deeper into the woods.<ref name="FALL" /> Therefore, the way to Nargothrond was open, and in autumn Morgoth sent forth his host of Orcs with [[Glaurung]] at its head. On their way, the [[dragon]] burned [[Talath Dirnen]], so their coming was soon known to the Elves.

===Battle===
Túrin counselled Orodreth to meet them in open battle. The host of Nargothrond went forth with Orodreth leading alongside Túrin and Gwindor. The host of Orcs was much larger than anticipated, and none could withstand the assault of the dragon Glaurung except for Túrin and his [[Dwarf-masks|dwarf-mask]]. The Elves were driven back into the field of Tumhalad.

In between [[Narog]] and [[Ginglith]] the host of Nargothrond was defeated. Orodreth was slain in the forefront of the battle, and Gwindor was mortally wounded.

===Aftermath===
Túrin bore a wounded Gwindor on his horse and fled the battlefield. In the woods, Gwindor urged Túrin to make haste back to Nargothrond and save [[Finduilas]], before dying from his wounds. Túrin gathered as much of the rout as possible and sped back to the fortress. The few survivors of the battle fled to Nargothrond. Some of those that escaped the destruction eventually made their way into Doriath<ref name="OTT" /> and some possibly fled as far as the [[Mouths of Sirion]].

After the defeat of the Elven host, Glaurung turned towards the stronghold, inevitably [[Fall of Nargothrond|sacking the city]].

==Other versions of the legendarium==
A version of the battle occurs in Tolkien's earliest writings of the [[Narn i Chîn Húrin (tale)|Tale of Turambar]] in ''[[Turambar and the Foalókë]]''. The site of the battle is not explicitly made clear, though the text implies that the battle took place at the home of the Rodothlim ([[Elves of Nargothrond]]) or at least in the vicinity.<ref>{{LT2|II}}, p.84</ref> Moreover it is worth mentioning that certain place-names are absent in the tale, one of which includes [[Tumhalad]].<ref>{{LT2|IIn}}, (x) Túrin among the Rodothlim; Túrin and Glorund, p. 135</ref> The main elements remain; the Rodothlim's policy of secrecy and Túrin changing that, which ultimately leads to their destruction.<ref>{{LT2|IIn}}, (iv) Túrin among the Rodothlim; Túrin and Glorund, p. 124</ref>

In the account of the battle told in ''[[The Silmarillion]]'', Orodreth was slain at Tumhalad and Gwindor was carried away and died later. In the ''[[Lost Tales]]'', Orodreth is carried off from the battle with the help of Flinding (Gwindor) and Orodreth reproaches Túrin for his role in the downfall of the Rodothlim - as does Gwindor in ''The Silmarillion''. It is noted that Gwindor took over most of the role of Orodreth when the story evolved, whilst Orodreth takes over the role of another character in the tale: [[Galweg]], who is absent entirely in ''The Silmarillion''. Galweg is notable for being the father of Failivrin (Finduilas), much as Orodreth was her father in ''The Silmarillion''.<ref>{{LT2|IIn}}, (iv) Túrin among the Rodothlim; Túrin and Glorund, p. 123</ref>

A version of the battle that is written in ''[[Annals of Beleriand|The Annals of Beleriand]]'', has Handir (presumably with his folk) participate in the battle and is slain at Tumhalad. In later writings, his death was moved earlier in time where he died in Brethil instead.<ref>{{SM|7I}}, §195, p. 305</ref><ref>{{LR|AB}}, §295, p. 139</ref>

{{references}}
[[Category:Conflicts in The Book of Lost Tales]]
[[Category:Conflicts of the First Age]]
[[de:Schlacht von Tumhalad]]
[[fr:encyclo:evenements:1a:guerres:bataille de tumhalad]]
[[fi:Tumhaladin taistelu]]