{{unnamed}}
{{disambig-more|Cirith Ungol|[[Cirith Ungol (disambiguation)]]}}
{{battle
| name=Battle of Cirith Ungol
| image=
| conflict=[[War of the Ring]]
| date=[[14 March]] {{TA|3019}}
| place=[[Tower of Cirith Ungol]]
| result=Tower emptied, [[Frodo Baggins]] liberated
| side1=Orcs of [[Tower of Cirith Ungol|Cirith Ungol]]
| side2=Orcs of [[Minas Morgul]]
| commanders1=[[Shagrat]]
| commanders2=[[Gorbag]]
| forces1=* [[Lagduf]]
* [[Muzgash]]
* [[Radbug]]
* [[Snaga (orc of Mordor)|Snaga]]
* Company of [[Orcs]]
| forces2=* More than 80 Orcs, including an unknown number of bowmen
| casual1=All Orcs save Shagrat and Snaga
| casual2=All Orcs
}}

The '''battle of Cirith Ungol''' was a battle fought between the Orc-garrison of [[Cirith Ungol]], and a company of [[Orcs]] of [[Minas Morgul]].

==Cause==
On [[10 March]], [[Frodo Baggins]] and his servant [[Samwise Gamgee]] passed [[Minas Morgul]].<ref name="Great">{{App|Great}}</ref>  This was noticed by the [[Two Watchers]], but a patrol led by [[Gorbag]] was not sent out until the 11th or 12th.  On the 13th, a message also reached the [[Tower of Cirith Ungol]], and [[Shagrat]], commander of the Tower and the [[Cirith Ungol|Pass]], set out. About an hour later, they met Gorbag's company, and quarrelled shortly. It was then that they found the body of Frodo, who had been paralyzed by [[Shelob]]. Although they realized there had to be more than one intruder (described by the Orcs as a "great Elf-warrior"), they took Frodo to the tower via the [[Under-way]], which led them into [[Shelob's Lair]] for a short time.<ref>{{TT|IV10}}</ref>

==Battle==
Frodo was stored in the topmost chamber of the tower, as Shagrat did not trust all of his troops, and none of Gorbag's.  When the prisoner was stripped and searched, Shagrat and Gorbag fought over possession of the artefacts: a ''[[Mithril]]'' shirt, an [[Galadhrim|Elvish]] cape, and a [[Barrow-blades|Barrow-blade]]. Gorbag especially wanted the ''mithril'' shirt. A fight ensued, which soon involved all present in the Tower. Shagrat was stabbed by Gorbag, but Shagrat managed to slay the other orc. Gorbag's troops reached the gate first, and shot [[Lagduf]] and [[Muzgash]], along with all of the others. Shagrat killed [[Radbug]], and threatened to do the same to [[[[Snaga (orc of Mordor)|Snaga]]]] if he continued to flout him. Snaga did, and Shagrat chased him. Snaga was saved when Shagrat realized Gorbag was not dead. As Shagrat choked Gorbag, Snaga went to the top of the turret.<ref name="Tower">{{RK|VI1}}</ref>

==Consequences==
Directly in the wake of the battle, Sam passed the Silent Watchers and found most of the Orcs dead.  Sam met Snaga upon the stairs, causing the Orc to flee upwards. After Shagrat had killed Gorbag he ran down the stairs with a bundle of Frodo's possessions. Encountering Sam, Shagrat fended off the hobbit and continued on his way out of the Tower. In the meantime, Sam ascended the Tower and killed Snaga when he whipped Frodo. After Sam had rescued Frodo the two hobbits were able to continue their mission to [[Mount Doom]].<ref name="Tower"/>

News of the hobbits' capture did not reach [[Barad-dûr]] until [[15 March]]. Unfortunately for Shagrat, so did news of their escape. On [[17 March]], upon bringing the tokens to [[Sauron]],<ref name="Great"/> Shagrat was slain in anger.   

==Portrayal in adaptations==
'''1980: [[The Return of the King (1980 film)|''The Return of the King'' (1980 film)]]:'''
:The tower's name is incorrectly referred to as "Sirith Ungol". [[Samwise Gamgee|Sam]] battles the tower's heavy gates. In front of the door, he miraculously finds both the [[The One Ring|Ring]], the elven cloak and [[Sting]]; the movie does not depict [[Shelob]] or Frodo's capture. Sam enters through [[Shelob's Lair]]. The Battle is only depicted as two Orcs fighting (one with a morning star,  the other with a scimitar), until the Ring urges Sam to go on without Frodo. When Sam comes back (because of simple "Hobbit sense"), he walks past the Watchers with the [[Phial of Galadriel]]. Passing the Watchers sets of an alarm, but few are left to attack the "Great Elf-warrior". Strangely, one remaining Orc on the steps knows what a Hobbit is. After slaying the very last Orc - who is flogging Frodo - Sam rescues Frodo.

'''2003: ''[[The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King]]'':'''
:The book is followed almost to the letter; Gorbag and Shagrat fight, and take the whole tower with them. When Sam arrives, only Shagrat, Gorbag, and three unknown Uruks are left alive, and Sam kills the latter three "for Frodo", "for [[the Shire]]" and "for my old [[Gaffer Gamgee|Gaffer]]", before stabbing Gorbag from behind with Sting. In the Extended edition, a short shot of Shagrat escaping with the ''mithril'' shirt is added.

'''2003: ''[[The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King (video game)|The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King video game]]'':'''

:In the video game adaptation of the movie, Sam enters the Tower of Cirith Ungol in the ''middle'' of the battle instead of during the aftermath. As a result, the tower is infested with Orcs and Uruks fighting each other, and Sam has to kill a multitude of them until they fall back to the higher levels, where Frodo can be found.

:After using a mounted crossbow to bombard a bridge full of fighting Orcs, Sam reaches the top where Shagrat and Gorbag are fighting over the Mithril shirt, and the latter knocks the former unconscious. During this fight, Sam fights Gorbag by throwing javelins to disarm him and then hacking at him with his sword. After Gorbag is killed, Frodo is rescued by Sam, and Shagrat covertly escapes the Tower with the Mithril shirt.

{{references}}
[[Category:Conflicts of the Third Age]]