{{battle
| name=Battle of Greenfields
| image = Gregor Roffalski - Bandobras Took.jpg
| conflict=Series of Orc-invasions in northern Eriador
| date={{TA|2747}}
| place=[[Greenfields]], [[Northfarthing]]
| result=Victory for the [[Hobbits]]
| side1=Hobbits
| side2=Orcs of [[Mount Gram]]
| commanders1=[[Bandobras Took|Bandobras "Bullroarer" Took]]
| commanders2=[[Golfimbul]] †
| forces1=Unknown
| forces2=Unknown
| casual1=Unknown
| casual2=Unknown
}}

The '''Battle of Greenfields''' or '''Battle of the Green Fields'''<ref name="Party">{{H|1}}</ref> was a battle that took place at the [[Greenfields]] region in the [[Northfarthing]] of [[the Shire]]. It was the first battle fought in the Shire, and the only one until the [[Battle of Bywater]].<ref name="Scouring">{{RK|Scouring}}</ref>

== History ==
=== Prelude ===
The Shire was generally untroubled by any harm for the first 1140 years of its history. [[Eriador]] was quiet until {{TA|2740}}, when [[Orcs of the Misty Mountains]] invaded several parts of Eriador.<ref name="AppB">{{App|TA}}</ref>

The [[Rangers of the North]] fought many battles trying to hold them back, but one party managed to reach the Shire.

=== The Battle ===
Seven years after the start of the unrest, a band of Orcs of [[Mount Gram]], led by their king [[Golfimbul]], entered the [[Northfarthing]].<ref name="Scouring"/> [[Bandobras Took]], who was living in [[Long Cleeve]], crossed the river [[Norbourn]] to engage them in the region of the [[Greenfields]], between the Norbourn and the [[Brandywine]].<ref name="Index">{{HM|UI}}, p. 24</ref> Large enough to ride a horse, Bandobras charged the helm of the Orc-band and knocked Golfimbul's head off with his club. The head landed in a [[Rabbits|rabbit]]-hole a hundred yards away.<ref name="Party"/> Dismayed by his death, the orcs fled.<ref name="Concerning">{{FR|Hobbits}}</ref>

===Aftermath===
With the rout of the orcs and the death of their king, their short uprisings within Eriador ceased, and eventually their attacks on the region stopped altogether.<ref name="Index"/> The Shire, and Eriador as a whole, would not suffer from any more invasions until the [[War of the Ring]].<ref name="Scouring"/>

Bandobras became a hero of Hobbit legend for his feat of arms, and was regarded in [[the Shire]] as one of the greatest Hobbits in history. To commemorate Golfimbul's head landing in the rabbit-hole, the hobbits invented the game of [[golf]].<ref name="Party"/>

== Other versions of the legendarium ==
In the first phase of ''The Hobbit'', Golfimbul was called "[[Fingolfin]]" and the conflict was called "’the '''Battle of the'''’ followed by a cancelled, illegible word of four or five letters that ended in -ll (possibly ‘Bull-’?)".<ref name=bullroarer>{{HH|Pryftan}}, p. 12 (note 7)</ref> This was immediately changed to the '''battle of the Green Fields of Fellin''',<ref name=Pryftan>{{HH|Pryftan}}, pp. 8-9</ref> before swiftly changing ''Fellin'' to '''''Fao''''' which in turn was changed, likely at once, to '''''Merria''''' before the word was fully written.<ref name=bullroarer/> [[John D. Rateliff]] notes that while these names never appear again, ''Merria'' bears a resemblance to the [[Merrill]], a stream in [[Rivendell]].<ref name=bullroarer/><ref name=river>{{RS|Weathertop}}, p. 205</ref> While Rateliff stated that he could not decipher the meanings of the names nor figure out what languages they are from, he noted that his friend, [[Taum Santoski]], had suggested in a linguistic note that ''Fellin'' may be connected with the [[Noldorin]] word ''fela'' ("cave") and that ''Merria'' may be connected with the [[Quenya]] word ''merka'' ("wild").<ref name=bullroarer/> Rateliff concluded that regardless of the names had actually meant, he is certain that they were not direct translations of "Green Field".<ref name=bullroarer/>

Tolkien originally wrote that chess, in addition to golf, was also invented, because the battle was won due to a "checkmate".<ref name=Pryftan/> It is possible that the reference to chess was likely removed because it was a philologist's joke that would have gone over too many heads: "checkmate" comes from Persian ''shah mat'' ("the King is Dead").<ref>"[http://www.etymonline.com/index.php?term=checkmate Checkmate]", [http://www.etymonline.com/index.php Etymonline.com]</ref> 

The name "Battle of the Green Fields" first arose in the second phase. The reference to chess was removed at this stage.<ref name="Bladorthin">{{HH|Bladorthin}}</ref>

In early versions of the [[Prologue]] to ''[[The Lord of the Rings]]'', Tolkien gave the date of the battle as 1137,<ref name=date>{{PM|Prologue}}, pp. 8-11, 15</ref> before changing it to 1347 and then 1147.<ref name=date/> It was changed to the published form in an early version of the Appendices.<ref name=peoples>{{PM|Elendil}}, pp. 211, 236</ref>

== Portrayal in adaptations ==
'''2003: [[The Hobbit (2003 video game)|''The Hobbit'' (2003 video game)]]:'''
:The first Hobbit outside [[Bag End]] recounts the story of Bandobras, followed by the accusations that young hobbits do not know enough about their history.<ref>[[The Hobbit (2003 video game)|''The Hobbit'' (2003 video game)]], "Hobbiton"</ref>

'''2006: ''[[The Lord of the Rings: The Battle for Middle-earth II]]'':'''
:In the evil campaign, the Goblins lay siege (and conquer) the Shire as part of their revenge; the Battle of Greenfields is not yet forgotten.<ref>''[[The Lord of the Rings: The Battle for Middle-earth II]]'', Evil Campaign Stage 3: "The Shire"</ref>

'''2007: ''[[The Lord of the Rings Online]]'':'''
:In the [https://lotro-wiki.com/wiki/Category:Shire_Epic_Prologue_Quests Shire Epic Prologue Quests], a group of [[Goblins]] led by [https://lotro-wiki.com/wiki/Lubach Lubach], were convinced by [https://lotro-wiki.com/wiki/Éogan Éogan] to invade the Shire by claiming that Lubach was the heir of Golfimbul.<ref>[https://lotro-wiki.com/wiki/Quest:Prologue:_Beneath_the_Greenfields Quest:Prologue: Beneath the Greenfields] in ''[https://lotro-wiki.com/wiki/Main_Page The Lord of the Rings Online]''</ref>

'''2012: ''[[The Hobbit: An Unexpected Journey]]'':'''
:[[Gandalf]] mentions the battle to [[Bilbo]], including the role of Bandobras Took, as part of an encouragement for Bilbo to go with the Dwarves.

{{References}}

[[Category:Conflicts of the Third Age]]
[[Category:History of the Shire]]

[[de:Schlacht von Grünfeld]]
[[fr:encyclo:evenements:3a:guerres:bataille des champs verts]]
[[fi:Viherkenttien taistelu]]