{{infobox character
| people=Unknown
| image=Mithril Miniatures - King Bladorthin.jpg
| caption="King Bladorthin" - ''[[Mithril Miniatures|Mithril Miniature]]''
| name=Bladorthin
| pronun=
| othernames=
| titles=[[King]]
| position=King of an unknown realm in [[Middle-earth]]
| location=Unknown
| affiliation=
| language=
| birth=
| birthlocation=
| rule=
| death=before {{TA|2941}}
| deathlocation=
| age=
| notablefor=
| parentage=
| siblings=
| spouse=
| children=
| race=Unknown
| gender=Male
| height=
| hair=
| eyes=
| clothing=
| weapons=
| steed=
}}
{{quote|... the spears that were made for the armies of the great King Bladorthin (long since dead), each had a thrice-forged head and their shafts were inlaid with cunning gold, but they were never delivered or paid for...|''[[The Hobbit]]'', "[[Inside Information]]"}}

'''Bladorthin''' was a great [[King]] of some realm of [[Middle-earth]], sometime in the [[Third Age]].<ref name="inside">{{H|Inside}}</ref>

Questions about whether Bladorthin was a [[Men|Man]] or an [[Elves|Elf]], or precisely where his kingdom lay, must remain within the realm of speculation.

== History ==
Sometime during the mid- to late [[Third Age]], Bladorthin ruled a kingdom which maintained armies and had a trade relationship with the [[Dwarves|Dwarven]] [[Kingdom under the Mountain]].<ref name="inside" />

Bladorthin charged the [[Dwarves of Erebor]] with making multiple spears for his armies. These spears were to each consist of "a thrice-forged head" with a shaft cunningly lined with [[gold]]. While the spears were forged, the Dwarves never delivered them and Bladorthin never payed for them. As a consequence, the spears remained in Erebor.<ref name="inside" />

In {{TA|2941}} during the [[Quest of Erebor]], long after Bladorthin had passed away, [[Thorin II|Thorin]] and [[Balin]] pondered on whether or not Bladorthin's order was still intact.<ref name="inside" />

== Etymology ==
[[John D. Rateliff]], noting that [[J.R.R. Tolkien|Tolkien]] never explained the meaning of ''Bladorthin'', identifies the name as "clearly [[Gnomish]] (or perhaps [[Noldorin]])". The Gnomish element ''blador'' "probably applies to wide open country" (cf. [[Bladorinand]], an early name of [[Beleriand]]), whereas the element ''-thin'' likely has the meaning of "grey" (as in ''[[Thingol#Etymology|'''Thin'''gol]]''). This would give the translation "the Grey Country", "Grey Plains Fay", or "Grey Master of the Plains".<ref name="HH">{{HM|HHO}}, pp. 52-3, 62-3</ref>

Like Rateliff, [[Andreas Möhn]] also identified the name as Gnomish, however, he claimed that ''blador'' meant "wide earth, flat earth" and interpreted the whole name as "wide earth-grey" or "Grey One of the wide lands". He also speculated that the [[Quenya]] form of ''Bladorthin'' may have been '''''Palursindo'''''.<ref name="Möhn">{{webcite|author=[[Andreas Möhn]]|articleurl=http://web.archive.org/web/20130107014744/http://lalaith.vpsurf.de/Tolkien/Bladorthin.html|articlename=The mysterious king Bladorthin and his political identity in the Third Age|dated=|website=Lalaith|accessed=30 July 2008}}</ref>

Unlike them, [[Michael Martinez|Michael L. Martinez]] did not believe that ''Bladorthin'' was Gnomish, noting not only that the element ''-blad'' only appeared in ''Bladorion'', a name which Tolkien abandoned, but also that the element is similar in sound to "Blaed(a)", an [[Old English]] name for "renowned".<ref name="endorion">[[Michael Martinez|Michael L. Martinez]], ''[[Parma Endorion|Parma Endorion: Essays on Middle-earth]]'', Chapter 7: "Things You Might Not Have Known About The Northmen", "The Great King Bladorthin", pp. 78-9</ref>

== Other versions of the legendarium ==
In the early drafts of ''[[The Hobbit]]'', Bladorthin was the name of [[Gandalf]] (who would later be assigned the colour "grey" in ''[[The Lord of the Rings]]'') for much of the narrative until Tolkien decided to change it late in the writing process. A connection can still be seen with the element ''-thin'' with the probable meaning "grey" (see [[#Etymology|above]]).<ref name="HH" />

== Portrayal in adaptations ==
'''2003: ''[[The Hobbit (2003 video game)]]'':'''
:Bladorthin's spears are some of the items that [[Bilbo Baggins]] must find in Erebor during a quest in the "Inside Information" chapter.

== Speculation ==
*[[Robert Foster]] suggests Bladorthin was an Elven king whose premature death prevented the trade. The speculation that his death was premature narrows down the time of his death between {{TA|1999}} (the establishment of the [[Kingdom under the Mountain]]) and {{TA|2770}} (its destruction by [[Smaug]]).<ref>{{HM|Guide}}, entry "Bladorthin"</ref>
*[[J.E.A. Tyler]] also interprets his death as premature.{{Fact}}
*[[Michael Martinez|Michael L. Martinez]] also interprets his death as premature, and suggests that he was a [[King of Dale]], perhaps an ancestor of [[Girion]].<ref name="endorion" />
*[[Douglas A. Anderson]] in ''[[The Annotated Hobbit]]'' suggests he was a [[Gift of Ilúvatar|mortal]] [[Men|Man]].<ref>{{HM|AH}}</ref>
*An article on the [[Tolkienwiki]] suggests not only that his death was premature but that his kingdom was destroyed by [[Sauron]], presumably located near the [[Sea of Rhûn]].<ref>{{webcite|author=The Tolkien Wiki Community|articleurl=http://www.thetolkienwiki.org/wiki.cgi?FAQ/Who__was__King__Bladorthin|articlename=FAQ: Who was King Bladorthin?|dated=24 August 2003|website=[http://www.thetolkienwiki.org/wiki.cgi Tolkienwiki]|accessed=29 June 2012}}</ref>
*[[Andreas Moehn]] counters most of the common theories, notably the interpretation that his death was premature. As ''The Hobbit'' does not mention his death as such, most probable is that Smaug's [[Sack of Erebor|descent]] on the [[Lonely Mountain]] in {{TA|2770}} was what prevented the trade. Therefore he must died sometime later. He also rejects the theory that his kingdom was related to Dale, and locates it in [[Dorwinion]]. In addition, he also suggests that Bladorthin may have been related to the Kings Thorin mentioned who used to send for the smiths of Erebor, rewarding "even the least skillful most richly"<ref name="unexpected">{{H|Party}}</ref>.<ref name="Möhn" />

== External links ==
*{{webcite|author=[[Andreas Möhn]]|articleurl=http://web.archive.org/web/20130107014744/http://lalaith.vpsurf.de/Tolkien/Fr_Men.html|articlename=The History of the Men of Darkness in Rhún and Harad|dated=|website=Lalaith|accessed=17 October 2012}}

{{references}}

[[Category:Characters of unknown race]]
[[Category:Enigmas]]
[[Category:Rulers in Middle-earth]]
[[Category:Third Age characters]]

[[de:Bladorthin]]
[[fi:Bladorthin]]