{{Poem infobox
| title=Bombadil Goes Boating
| image=Pauline Baynes - Bombadil Goes Boating chapterhead.jpeg
| caption=Chapterhead illustration by [[Pauline Baynes]]
| other names=germ of Tom Bombadil<br>''The Fliting of Tom Bombadil'',<br>''The Merry Fliting of Tom Bombadil'',<br>''The Adventures of Tom Bombadil II: The Merry Fliting''<br>''Fliting''
| written=mid-1930s
| revised=1962
| published=''[[The Adventures of Tom Bombadil]]''<br>''[[The Collected Poems of J.R.R. Tolkien]]''
| subject=[[Tom Bombadil]]
}}
'''''Bombadil Goes Boating''''' is a poem written by [[J.R.R. Tolkien]] and was published in ''[[The Adventures of Tom Bombadil]]''.<ref>{{AB|Boating}}</ref> 

As part of the Shire-lore recorded in the [[Red Book]], the poem was composed after the [[War of the Ring]] in [[Buckland]], displaying knowledge of the geography around it.<ref>{{AB|Preface}}</ref> However it possibly refers to a time before [[22 September]] {{TA|3018}}<ref>{{L|240}}</ref> when troublesome news reached [[the Shire]] from around its borders.<ref>{{FR|Ordering}}</ref>

==Synopsis==
One autumn [[Tom Bombadil]] decides to go boating down the [[Withywindle]] and starts mending and preparing his cockle-boat. A bird called [[Willow-wren]] starts conversing and teasing him. Then Bombadil starts boating in order to go to the [[Brandywine]] and meet some [[hobbits]] he knows there and the wren flies to notify [[Farmer Maggot]]. He meets and teases a [[Kingfishers|Kingfisher]] named [[Fisher Blue]], which leaves behind a blue feather, which Tom puts onto his hat (replacing his old swan feather). He also meets [[Whisker-lad]] of thr [[Otter-folk]]) and the [[Old Swan]] of the [[Elvet-isle]].

The [[Withy-weir]] pulls Tom to the [[Grindwall]] where he lands his boat; some [[Bucklanders]] of [[Haysend]] and [[Breredon]] tease him and shoot three arrows into his hat. Tom asks someone to ferry him over [[Brandywine]] by [[Shirebourn]] as the water is so swift for his own boat.

At sunset Tom climbs the [[Mithe Steps]] and walks along the [[Causeway]] towards [[Rushey]]. [[Farmer Maggot]], on his wagon, mockingly asks his business, saying that a beggar won't find any beer to buy and drink. Tom teases him back boarding the cart and they are off to [[Bamfurlong]] laughing. 

There Maggot's family greet and serve Tom, and his daughters dance the [[Springle-ring]]. After they fall asleep, Tom and the Farmer spend the night exchanging all kind of news and gossip:

<poem style="font-style:italic; margin-left:20px;">
old Tom and Muddy-feet, swapping all the tidings
from [[Barrow-downs]] to [[Tower Hills]]: of walkings and of ridings;
of wheat-ear and barley-corn, of sowing and of reaping;
queer tales from [[Bree]], and talk at smithy, mill, and cheaping;
rumours in whispering trees, south-wind in the larches,
tall [[Rangers of the North|Watchers]] by the [[Sarn Ford|Ford]], [[Black Riders|Shadows]] on the marches.
</poem>

When dawn comes, Tom has mysteriously vanished without leaving any trace; his boat is untouched at the Grindwall for three days. Then the abovementioned animals decide to pull it back to Tom's creek, around the [[Old Man Willow]]'s crooked roots. But they have forgotten the oars that lay behind waiting for Tom to collect them.

==Development==
[[J.R.R. Tolkien]] wrote the poem preparing for the publication of ''The Adventures of Tom Bombadil'' and he aimed to connect the collection better with the [[legendarium]] of ''[[The Lord of the Rings]]''.<ref>{{AB|Intro}}</ref>

It seems to be based on a very old poem written in early 1930s, where the name "Tom Bombadil" is first mentioned, who goes boating. There some names are mentioned, including 
"Bill Willoughby" and "Harry Larraby" which also appear in a first draft of the poem. Early titles of the poem included the word "Fliting", as it was centered in good-humored exchange of teasings and insults, a contest appearing in [[Norse]] and medieval poetry.<ref>{{AB|Comm}}</ref>

==See also==
*[[Poems by J.R.R. Tolkien]]

{{references}}
{{poems}}

[[Category:Poems in The Adventures of Tom Bombadil]]
[[de:Tom geht rudern]]
[[fi:Bombadil veneilee]]