{{infobox character
| people=[[Gondorians|Gondorian]]
| name=Borondir
| image=The Lord of the Rings Online - Borondir.jpg
| caption=Borondir in ''[[The Lord of the Rings Online]]''
| pronun=
| othernames=''Udalraph'' ([[Sindarin|S.]] "Stirrupless")
| titles=
| position=Soldier of Gondor
| location=[[Gondor]]
| affiliation=
| language=[[Westron]]
| birth=
| birthlocation=
| rule=
| death=[[15 April]], {{TA|2510}}
| deathlocation=[[Battle of the Field of Celebrant]]
| age=
| notablefor=
| house=descendant of a Northern Captain
| parentage=
| siblings=
| spouse=
| children=
| gender=Male
| height=
| hair=
| eyes=
| clothing=
| weapons=
| steed=
}}
'''Borondir Udalraph''' (died [[15 April]], {{TA|2510}}) was a [[Gondor]]ian soldier during their war against the [[Balchoth]]. He was one of six riders sent to seek the aid of the [[Northmen]], and was the only one to reach them alive. He brought the Northmen to the [[Battle of the Field of Celebrant]], but died protecting his lord [[Cirion]].<ref name=Ride>{{UT|Ride}}</ref>

==History==
Borondir was a great rider who possessed great courage and great endurance, whose family claimed to be descended from a captain of the Northmen who served under the old [[King of Gondor|kings of Gondor]].<ref name=Ride/>

At the end of the winter of {{TA|2509}}, a large force of [[Balchoth]] was mustering along the southern edge of [[Mirkwood]]. When Cirion, the [[Ruling Stewards|Steward]] of Gondor, learned of this danger and called for volunteers to ride to the [[Éothéod]], a group of Northmen who lived near the upper [[Vales of Anduin]], to ask them for help. Borondir came forward and was chosen by Cirion as one of six riders. On [[10 March]] of {{TA|2510}}, Borondir was senty by Cirion in the first of three pairs of riders to ride to the Éothéod. Each pair was sent out with a day's interval between them, and each rider was given a message learned by heart and a small stone incised with the seal of the Stewards.<ref name=Ride/>

Borondir's companion was killed in an ambush near [[Dol Guldur]], but Borondir escaped with luck and the speed of his horse. He was pursued as far north as the [[Gladden Fields]]. When he reached the Éothéod on [[25 March]], he had gone two days without food, and was so spent that he could barely speak Cirion's message to their leader [[Eorl]]. He was the only messenger that arrived at Éothéod. Nothing was ever heard again of the other four riders.<ref name=Ride/>

Eorl gathered an army of approximately seven thousand fully-armed riders and some hundreds of horsed archers, and set forth on [[6 April]]. Borondir rode by Eorl's right hand to serve as guide. When a gleaming white mist flowed from the [[Elves|elven]] realm of [[Lothlórien]] over the river Anduin drove back the glooms of [[Dol Guldur]] and hid their approach, it seemed to Borondir that [[Galadriel]], the lady of Lothlórien was assisting them on their way past Dol Guldur.<ref name=Ride/> 

The Éothéod arrived at the [[Battle of the Field of Celebrant]] in time to rescue the Gondorian army, which was backed against the [[Limlight]] river in a hopeless situation. Borondir was the first to cross the river, and cleft a path to aid Cirion.<ref name=UTNote>{{UT|8e}}, note 27</ref> The arrival of the Éothéod swung the battle, and the Balchoth were crushed,<ref name=Ride/><ref>{{App|Eorl}}, entry for Eorl the Young, p. 1064</ref><ref>{{App|Stewards}}, entry for Steward Cirion, p. 1053</ref> but Borondir died defending Cirion.<ref name=UTNote/>

After the battle, Borondir was laid in a tomb in the [[Hallows]] of [[Minas Tirith]]. He was long remembered in the song of ''[[Rochon Methestel]]'', the "Rider of Last Hope".<ref name=UTNote/>

==Etymology==
''Borondir'' is probably a [[Sindarin]] name. Its meaning and components are not glossed, but it possibly means "Steadfast-man" and is a compound of ''boron'' ("steadfast", "trusty man", "faithful vassal") and ''dîr'' ("man").<ref>{{webcite|author=[[Paul Strack]]|articleurl=https://www.eldamo.org/content/words/word-2898073391.html|articlename=S. ''Borondir'' m.|website=Eldamo|accessed=08 March 2024}}</ref><ref>{{HM|GS}}, p. 344</ref>

==Other names==
Borondir's ''Sindarin''<ref>{{webcite|author=[[Paul Strack]]|articleurl=https://www.eldamo.org/content/words/word-2305010313.html|articlename=S. ''Udalraph'' m.|website=Eldamo|accessed=08 March 2024}}</ref><ref>{{HM|GS}}, p. 358</ref> epithet '''Udalraph''' means "the Stirrupless".<ref name=UTNote/>

==Portrayal in adaptations==
'''2020: ''[[The Lord of the Rings Online]]'':'''
:Borondir briefly appears in a flashback narrating the history of the [[Éothéod]].

{{references}}

[[Category:Dúnedain]]
[[Category:Gondorians]]
[[Category:Third Age characters]]

[[de:Borondir]]
[[fi:Borondir]]
[[fr:encyclo:personnages:hommes:3a:dunedain:gondoriens:borondir]]