{{author infobox
| image = C.S. Lewis.jpg
| name=C.S. Lewis
| born=[[29 November]], [[1898]]
| died=[[22 November]], [[1963]]
| education=[[University of Oxford]]
| occupation=Author
| location=England
| website=[http://www.cslewis.org/ C.S. Lewis Foundation]
}}
{{quote|Friendship with the latter marked the breakdown of two old prejudices. At my first coming into the world I had been (implicitly) warned never to trust a Papist, and at my first coming into the English Faculty (explicitly) never to trust a philologist. Tolkien was both.|C.S. Lewis, ''Surprised by Joy''}}
'''Clive Staples "Jack" Lewis''' ([[29 November]], [[1898]] – [[22 November]], [[1963]]), commonly referred to as '''C.S. Lewis''', was an Irish-born English writer and scholar. Lewis is known for his work on medieval literature, Christian apologetics, literary criticism, and fiction. He is best known today for his bestselling series ''[[The Chronicles of Narnia]]''.

==Biography==
{{rewrite}}
Lewis was a close friend of [[J.R.R. Tolkien]]. Both authors were leading figures in the English faculty at [[Oxford University]] and in the informal Oxford literary group known as the [[Inklings]], where he was a leading figure. According to his memoir ''Surprised by Joy'', Lewis had been baptised in the Church of Ireland at birth, but fell away from his faith during his adolescence. Owing to the influence of Tolkien and other friends, at about the age of 30, Lewis re-converted to [[Christianity]], becoming "a very ordinary layman of the Church of England". His conversion had a profound effect on his work, and his wartime radio broadcasts on the subject of Christianity brought him wide acclaim.

In the 1930s Tolkien and Lewis discussed about science fiction and decided to make an amateurish attempt simultaneously, on time-travel and space-travel. Tolkien's attempt at time-travel fiction was the unfinished ''[[The Lost Road]]'', but Lewis's attempt at space-travel fiction evolved to his famous [[Space Trilogy]].<ref>{{L|24}}</ref>

Throughout the writing of ''[[The Lord of the Rings]]'' Lewis kept encouraging Tolkien and supported him with positive reviews, and enthusiastic blurbs before publication. At some point Tolkien recognised that without Lewis he would have never finished the book.<ref>{{L|149}}</ref>

His brother was Inkling [[Warren Lewis]], who after his retirement acted as C.S. Lewis's secretary.

In later years, around [[1940]], Tolkien and Lewis distanced from each other; Tolkien credited the influence of [[Charles Williams]] (whom Tolkien did not appreciate much<ref>{{L|276}}</ref>) on Lewis. They distanced further after his "very strange" marriage to [[Wikipedia:Joy Gresham|Joy Gresham]] ([[1956]]<ref>Walter Hooper, ''C. S. Lewis: A Complete Guide to His Life and Works'', p. 79</ref>). Lewis remained dear to Tolkien, and Tolkien was struck by his death<ref>{{L|257}}</ref> which coincided with the murder of J.F. Kennedy. As Tolkien said "The loss reached for me its climax on Nov. 22nd, not for me the day Kennedy was murdered, but the day C.S. Lewis died".<ref>[[Letter to Przemyslaw Mroczkowski (20–26 January 1964)]]</ref> Tolkien also said that while he was already feeling like an old tree losing its leaves, Lewis's death was "an axe-blow near the roots". His funeral service was attended by Tolkien himself, [[Christopher Tolkien]], [[James Dundas-Grant]], [[Robert Havard]], [[Owen Barfield]] and several others.<ref>{{L|251}}</ref>

==Bibliography, selected==
===Books by C.S. Lewis===
*[[1933]]: ''[[The Pilgrim's Regress: An Allegorical Apology for Christianity Reason and Romanticism]]''
*[[1936]]: ''The Allegory of Love: A Study in Medieval Tradition''
*[[The Space Trilogy|Ransom trilogy]]
**[[1938]]: ''Out of the Silent Planet''
**[[1943]]: ''Perelandra: A Novel'' (aka Voyage to Venus)
**[[1945]]: ''That Hideous Strength: A Modern Fairy-Tale for Grown-Ups''
*[[1939]]: ''[[Rehabilitations and Other Essays]]''
*[[1940]]: ''A Preface to Paradise Lost''
*[[1940]]: ''The Problem of Pain''
*[[1942]]: ''[[The Screwtape Letters]]''
*[[1945]]: ''The Great Divorce: A Dream''
*[[1946]]: ''George MacDonald: An Anthology'' (edited by C.S. Lewis)
*[[1947]]: ''[[Essays Presented to Charles Williams]]'' (editor)
*[[1948]]: ''Arthurian Torso, Containing the Posthumous Fragment of the Figure of Arthur by Charles Williams and a Commentary on the Arthurian Poems of Charles Williams by C. S. Lewis''
*[[1949]]: ''Transposition and Other Addresses''
*[[1949]]: ''The Weight of Glory and Other Addresses''
*[[1952]]: ''Mere Christianity''
*[[1954]]: ''English Literature in the Sixteenth Century Excluding Drama''
*''[[The Chronicles of Narnia]]''
**[[1950]]: ''The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe''
**[[1951]]: ''Prince Caspian''
**[[1952]]: ''The Voyage of the Dawn Treader''
**[[1953]]: ''The Silver Chair''
**[[1954]]: ''The Horse and His Boy''
**[[1955]]: ''The Magician's Nephew''
**[[1956]]: ''The Last Battle''
*[[1956]]: ''[[Till We Have Faces: A Myth Retold]]''
*[[1955]]: ''Surprised by Joy: The Shape of My Early Life''
*[[1958]]: ''Reflections on the Psalms''
*[[1960]]: ''The Four Loves''
*[[1960]]: ''The World’s Last Night and Other Essays''
*[[1961]]: ‘’Am Experiment in Criticism''
*[[1962]]: ''[[English and Medieval Studies Presented to J.R.R. Tolkien on the Occasion of his Seventieth Birthday]]''
**"[[The Anthropological Approach]]"

===Articles by C.S. Lewis===
*[[1937]] ''Times Literary Supplement'', 2 October 1937, p. 714.
**"[[A World for Children]]" [review of ''[[The Hobbit]]'']
*[[1937]]: ''The Times'' (London), 8 October 1937, p. 20. 
**"[[Professor Tolkien's "Hobbit"|Professor Tolkien's 'Hobbit']]" [review of ''[[The Hobbit]]'']
*[[1947]]: ''[[Essays Presented to Charles Williams]]'', pp. 90-105
**"On Stories"
*[[1954]]: ''Time and Tide'', 14 August 1954, p. 1082.
**"[[The Gods Return to Earth]]" [review of ''[[The Fellowship of the Ring]]'']
*[[1955]]: ''Time and Tide'', 22 October 1955, p. 1373.
**"[[The Dethronement of Power]]" [review of ''[[The Two Towers]]'' and ''[[The Return of the King]]'']

===Books by others===
*[[1964]]: ''Letters to Malcolm, Chiefly on Prayer''
*[[1964]]: ''The Discarded Image: An Introduction to Medieval and Renaissance Literature''
*[[1966]]: ''[[Letters of C.S. Lewis]]'' (written by Warren Hamilton Lewis)
*[[1966]]: ''Studies in Medieval and Renaissance Literature'' (edited by Walter Hooper)
*[[1967]]: ''[[Letters to an American Lady]]'' (edited by Clyde S. Kilby)
*[[1967]]: ''Christian Reflections'' (edited by Walter Hooper)
*[[1969]]: ''Narrative Poems'' (edited by Walter Hooper)
*[[1969]]: ''[[Selected Literary Essays]]'' (edited by Walter Hooper)
*[[1970]]: ''God in the Dock: Essays on Theology and Ethics'' (edited by Walter Hooper)
*[[1972]]: ''Of This and Other Worlds'' (edited by Walter Hooper)
*[[1977]]: ''The Dark Tower and Other Stories'' (edited by Walter Hooper)
*[[1979]]: ''C. S. Lewis at the Breakfast Table and Other Reminiscences'' (edited by James T. Como)
*[[1982]]: ''Brothers and Friends: The Diaries of Major Warren Hamilton Lewis'' (written by Warren Hamilton Lewis and edited by Clyde S. Kilby and Marjorie Lamp)
*[[1996]]: ''C. S. Lewis: A Complete Guide to His Life and Works'' (edited by Walter Hooper)
*[[1996]]: ''Surprised By Laughter: The Comic World of C. S. Lewis''
*''[[The Collected Letters of C.S. Lewis]]''
**[[2000]]: ''[[The Collected Letters of C.S. Lewis: Family Letters 1905-1931]]''
**[[2004]]: ''[[The Collected Letters of C.S. Lewis: Books, Broadcasts, and the War 1931-1949]]''
**[[2006]]: ''[[The Collected Letters of C.S. Lewis: Narnia, Cambridge, and Joy 1950-1963]]''
*[[2010]]: ''[[Language and Human Nature]]'' (edited by Steven A. Beebe in ''[[SEVEN 27]])
*[[2012]]: ''Light: C. S. Lewis's First and Final Short Story'' (edited by Charlie W. Starr)
*[[2013]]: ''[[Image and Imagination: Essays and Reviews]]''
*[[2020]]: ''The Collected Poems of C. S. Lewis: A Critical Edition'' (edited by Don W. King)

==External links==
*{{WP|C.S. Lewis}}

{{references}}
{{Inklings}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:Lewis, C.S.}}
[[Category:Inklings]]
[[Category:Authors]]
[[Category:Letter receivers]]
[[Category:British people]]
[[Category:People by name]]

[[de:C. S. Lewis]]
[[fi:C.S. Lewis]]