{{disambig-two|the [[Kings of Gondor|King]] of [[Gondor]]|the [[Númenóreans|Númenórean]] royal|[[Cemendur (son of Axantur)]]}}{{infobox character
| people=[[Gondorians|Gondorian]]
| name=Cemendur
| image=Matěj Čadil - Cemendur of Gondor.jpg
| caption="Cemendur of Gondor" by [[Matěj Čadil]]
| pronun=
| othernames=
| titles=[[Kings of Gondor|King of Gondor]]
| position=
| location=[[Gondor]]
| affiliation=
| language=[[Sindarin]], [[Westron]]
| birth={{SA|3399}}
| birthlocation=
| rule={{TA|158}} - {{TA|238}} (80 years)
| death={{TA|238}}
| deathlocation=
| age=280
| notablefor=
| house=[[House of Anárion]]
| parentage=[[Meneldil]]
| siblings=
| spouse=
| children=[[Eärendil (King of Gondor)|Eärendil]]
| gender=Male
| height=
| hair=
| eyes=
| clothing=
| weapons=
| steed=
}}
'''Cemendur''' ({{SA|3399}}<ref name="Elendil">{{PM|Elendil}}</ref> – {{TA|238}},<ref name="south">{{App|South}}</ref> aged 280 years) was the fourth [[King of Gondor]].

==History==
Cemendur ruled for 80 years, from {{TA|158}} until his death. He was the son and successor of Meneldil, the first ruler of [[Gondor]] to rule in his own name.<ref name="south"/>

Little is known about his reign, only that it was a peaceful one. He was succeeded by his son [[Eärendil (King of Gondor)|Eärendil]].

==Etymology==
''Cemendur'' is a [[Quenya]] name. Its meaning is not glossed, but as Paul Strack and Helge Fauskanger explain it seems to mean "Servant of the Earth" or "Earth-servant" and to be a compound of [[kemen|cemen]] ("earth") and [[-ndur|-(n)dur]] ("servant").<ref>{{webcite|author=Paul Strack|articleurl=https://www.eldamo.org/content/words/word-1006418195.html|articlename=Q. ''Cemendur'' m.|website=Eldamo|accessed=29 October 2021}}</ref><ref>{{webcite|author=[[Helge Fauskanger]]|articleurl=http://folk.uib.no/hnohf/quen-eng.htm|articlename=Quettaparma Quenyallo|dated=December 25, 2008|website=Arda}}</ref>

[[Robert Foster]], perhaps incorrectly, translates the name as "Earth Lord".<ref>[[Robert Foster]], ''[[The Complete Guide to Middle-earth]]'', p. 67</ref>

== Genealogy ==
{{familytree/start}}
{{familytree | | | ANA | | |ANA=[[Anárion]]<br/><small>''{{SA|3219}} - {{SA|3440|n}}''†</small>}}
{{familytree | |,|-|^|-|.| |}}
{{familytree | UNN | | MEN |UNN=''Three children''<br/><small>''unknown''</small>|MEN=[[Meneldil]]<br/><small>''{{SA|3318}} - {{TA|158}}''</small>}}
{{familytree | | | | | |!| |}}
{{familytree | | | | | CEM |CEM='''CEMENDUR'''<br/><small>''{{SA|3399}} - {{TA|238}}''</small>}}
{{familytree | | | | | |!| |}}
{{familytree | | | | | EAR |EAR=[[Eärendil (King of Gondor)|Eärendil]]<br/><small>''{{TA|48}} - {{TA|324|n}}''</small>}}
{{familytree | | | | | |!| |}}
{{familytree | | | | | ANA |ANA=[[Anardil (King of Gondor)|Anardil]]<br/><small>''{{TA|136}} - {{TA|411|n}}''</small>}}
{{familytree/end}}

== Other versions of the legendarium ==
In ''[[The Peoples of Middle-earth]]'', Section VII "[[The Heirs of Elendil]]", it was explained that three manuscripts existed in the textual history of this section.  Manuscript A contained the Southern Line of Gondor, and appeared to be the first stage of composition.  Manuscript B added the Northern Line, and began as a fair copy of A for the Southern line but became heavily emended.  Manuscript B led to Manuscript C, a fine copy (but with later emendations), which led to a final typescript D.  In the earlier Manuscripts A and B, Kemendur was spelled with a 'K' and he lived from {{SA}} 3389 to {{TA}} 228 instead of {{SA|3399}} to {{TA|238}}.<ref name="Elendil"/>

{{references}}
{{seq-start}}
{{seq-head
| race=gondorian
| house=[[House of Anárion]]<small><br/>Cadet branch of the [[House of Elendil]]</small>
| born={{SA|3399}}
| died={{TA|238}}
}}
{{seq
| prev=[[Meneldil]]
| list=4th [[King of Gondor]]
| dates={{TA|158}} – {{TA|238|n}}
| next=[[Eärendil (King of Gondor)|Eärendil]]
}}
{{seq-end}}

{{southernline}}

{{title}}
[[Category:House of Anárion]]
[[Category:Rulers of Gondor]]
[[Category:Gondorians]]
[[Category:Second Age characters]]
[[Category:Third Age characters]]
[[de:Cemendur (König von Gondor)]]
[[fr:encyclo:personnages:hommes:3a:dunedain:gondoriens:cemendur]]
[[fi:Cemendur (Gondorin kuningas)]]