{{disambig-two|the advisors to the [[Master of Lake-town]]|title in the [[Fourth Age]]|[[Counsellor of the North-kingdom]]}}
{{Unnamed}}
{{infobox character
| people=[[Northmen|Northman]]
| name=Councillors
| image=The Hobbit - The Desolation of Smaug - Alfrid.jpg
| caption="Alfrid" in ''[[The Hobbit: The Desolation of Smaug]]''
| pronun=
| othernames=
| titles=
| position=Civil servant
| location=[[Lake-town]]
| affiliation=[[Lake-men]]
| language=[[Westron]]
| birth=
| birthlocation=
| rule=
| death=
| deathlocation=
| age=
| notablefor=Speaking with [[Master of Lake-town|the Master]] and [[Thorin]], Bidding [[Thorin and Company]] farewell from [[Lake-town]]
| house=
| parentage=
| siblings=
| spouse=
| children=
| gender=
| height=
| hair=
| eyes=
| clothing=
| weapons=
| steed=
| gallery=Alfrid Lickspittle|councillors
}}
The [[Master of Lake-town]] was advised by an unknown number of '''councillors''' during the late [[Third Age]].<ref name="H10">{{H|10}}</ref>

==History==
During the [[Quest of Erebor]] in [[Third Age 2941|2941]], when [[Thorin and Company]] arrived in [[Lake-town]], they were brought by the [[captain of the guard]] to the [[Great House]] in the market-place where the Master was feasting, possibly with his councillors. After a fortnight, [[Thorin II|Thorin]] thought about leaving and told the Master and his councilors that they must leave soon. When the company departed a few days later, the "Master and his councilors bade them farewell from the great steps of the town-hall that went down to the [[Long Lake|lake]]".<ref name="H10"/>

After the Master of Lake-town caught the dragon-sickness and fled from Lake-town with [[gold]] and some companions,<ref name=Stage>{{H|19}}</ref> it is possible that some of these companions may have been the Master's former councillors.{{Fact}} These companions eventually deserted him and he starved to death in the [[Waste]] sometime between the years [[Third Age 2941|2941]] and [[Third Age 2949|2949]].<ref name=Stage/>

==Portrayal in adaptations==
'''2012-4: [[The Hobbit (film series)|''The Hobbit'' (film series)]]:'''
:'''Alfrid Lickspittle''' is a merged version of the Master's councillors that was invented for [[The Hobbit (film series)|''The Hobbit'' (film series)]], where he was portrayed by [[Ryan Gage]].<ref>{{webcite|author=[[Peter Jackson]]|articleurl=http://www.facebook.com/note.php?note_id=10150257180211558|articlename=Casting News for The Hobbit|dated=19-May-2011|website=FB|accessed=22-Dec-2011}}</ref>

:Alfrid Lickspittle serves as the [[Master of Lake-town]]'s deputy and chief overseer, advising the Master in matters of diplomacy, trade, and the defense of [[Lake-town]]. He always alerted the Master of any potential plots against his power - much to the chagrin of some [[Lake-town]] residents. He and the Master particularly have [[Bard]] in their sights, knowing his relation to [[Girion]], last [[Lord of Dale]]. When [[Smaug]] arrives to demolish the town, he and the Master - along with a few guards - empty out the town's treasury into a boat and attempt to retreat with it. However, when the overloaded boat started spilling treasure into the lake, the Master pushes Alfrid overboard in order to lessen the weight.

:When the town's refugees gather on the shore of [[Long Lake]] in the aftermath of the destruction, Bard is immediately praised for slaying the [[Dragons|Dragon]] and the citizens look to him for guidance. Alfrid immediately champions Bard despite the disapproval of several people. When the [[Battle of Five Armies]] begins, Alfrid spends most of his time showing his cowardice by attempting to hide from it - even disguising himself as a woman at one point - despite Bard ordering every able man to take up arms, and specifically telling Alfrid to join the fight. Not long after finding a treasure trove in the ruins of [[Dale]], Bard, after saving him from an attack by an [[Ogres|Ogre]], tells him to leave and not come back.

:After his encounter with Bard, Alfrid hides in a catapult, which he inadvertently sets off when one of the coins that he has collected drops on the release trigger. This launches him into the mouth of a [[Trolls|Troll]] that was about to attack [[Gandalf]]. Alfrid's accidental stunt kills both the Troll and himself. When the Troll falls to the ground, Gandalf is made aware of the Troll that almost attacked him, only to see Alfrid dead in its mouth.<ref>''[[The Hobbit: The Battle of the Five Armies (extended edition)]]''</ref>

{{References}}

[[Category:Characters in The Hobbit]]
[[Category:Lake-men]]
[[Category:Positions and occupations]]
[[Category:Third Age characters]]

[[fi:Alfrid (elokuvahahmo)]]