{{organization infobox
| name=Dark Guard
| image = Ted Nasmith - He Beheld a Vision of Gondolin Amid the Snow.jpg
| caption="He Beheld a Vision of Gondolin Amid the Snow" by [[Ted Nasmith]]
| pronun=
| othernames=Outer Guard<br>Guard
| founded=
| founder=
| purpose=Guarding the [[Gate of Wood|Outer Gate]] of [[Gondolin]]
| members=[[Elemmakil]]
| location=Cavern near the Outer Gate<br>High sward overlooking [[Tumladen]]
| disbanded=
| notablefor=
}}

The '''Dark Guard''', also known as the '''Outer Guard''', was a division of [[Gondolindrim]] that guarded the [[Gate of Wood|Outer Gate]] of [[Gondolin]] in the dark cavern that preceded it. They were the first Gondolindrim to confront those who attempted to enter the city through the [[Seven Gates of Gondolin|Seven Gates]].<ref name=SilmMaeglin>{{S|Maeglin}}</ref><ref name=Tuor>{{UT|Tuor}}, pp. 45-50</ref> 

== History ==
In the year {{FA|400}}, [[Aredhel]], returning to Gondolin with her son [[Maeglin]], was happily received by the Dark Guard. However, [[Eöl]] had followed them from a distance, discovering the secret entrance into the city. The Dark Guard was taken by surprise when Eöl revealed his presence to them while traversing the [[Orfalch Echor]] by stealth. After he claimed that Aredhel was his wife, the Guard brought him before [[Turgon]] in the [[Tower of the King]].<ref name=SilmMaeglin/>

Years later, the Dark Guard was approached by [[Tuor]] and [[Voronwë]] in their cavern in front of the Outer Gate, the Gate of Wood. Their captain, [[Elemmakil]], was amazed that his friend Voronwë would bring a mortal [[Man]] with him. He announced that he should, by law, slay him. Voronwë and Tuor answered that they came at the command of [[Ulmo]]. As Elemmakil guided the two through the Seven Gates, they passed the guard divisions of the other gates.<ref name=Tuor/>

On the inner side of the [[Gate of Steel|Last Gate]], an unknown number of Elves representing the Dark Guard were stationed at the high sward overlooking [[Tumladen]]. They stood with an army of soldiers that contained representatives from each of the Seven Gates.<ref name=Tuor/>

{{references}}

{{gondolin}}

[[Category:First Age characters]]
[[Category:Gondolin]]
[[Category:Gondolindrim]]
[[Category:Noldor]]
[[Category:Organizations]]