{{author infobox
| image = David Salo.jpg
| name=David Salo
| born=[[1969]]
| died=
| education=University of Wisconsin, Madison
| occupation=Linguist
| location=
| website=
}}
'''David I. Salo''' (born February, [[1969]]) is a linguist who worked on languages for [[The Lord of the Rings (film series)|''The Lord of the Rings'']] and ''[[The Hobbit (film series)|The Hobbit]]'' films series, translating songs, dialogue, and inscriptions into Quenya and Sindarin, and developing or expanding languages for Men, Dwarves and Orcs.<ref>{{webcite|author=Kristin Thompson |articleurl=http://www.theonering.net/torwp/2011/09/11/47992-david-salo-linguistic-consultant-for-the-hobbit-speaks-at-geek-kon/|articlename=David Salo, Linguistic Consultant for The Hobbit, speaks at Geek Kon|dated=11 September 2011|website=TORN|accessed=17 March 2014}}</ref><ref>{{webcite|author= Jenny Price 
|articleurl=http://www.detnews.com/2002/entertainment/0201/03/f08-379930.htm |articlename=Scholar of Tolkien languages helped 'Rings' movie makers stay authentic to source|dated=2 January 2002|website=''Detroit News''|accessed=17 March 2014}}</ref><ref>{{webcite|author=Susan Lampert Smith |articleurl=http://www.madison.com/wisconsinstatejournal/local/40925.php|articlename=UW grad student provides translations for Lord of the Rings movies|dated=18 January 2003|website=''Wisconsin State Journal''|accessed=17 March 2014}}</ref>

He runs ''[[Elfling]]'', a forum of Tolkien-invented languages.

David Salo lives in [[Wikipedia:Madison, Wisconsin|Madison, Wisconsin]].

==Tolkien's languages==

Salo's interest in Tolkien's languages arose when he read Tolkien's work as a boy, but press interviews date his extensive knowledge of the languages to the years after the completion of his undergraduate degree. In 1998 he founded the [[Elfling]] mailing list for [[Tolkienists|Tolkienist]] language enthusiasts. In 2004 he published a linguistic analysis of [[Sindarin]]: ''[[A Gateway to Sindarin]]''.

David Salo was contracted for ''The Lord of the Rings'' and ''The Hobbit'' movies to write all the material in [[Elvish]], [[Khuzdul|Dwarven]] and other languages, as well as assist with other language-related items such as the [[Tengwar]] and [[Cirth]] inscriptions which appear in the movies. Salo also wrote Elvish lyrics for the movie soundtracks.

For the movies Salo had to create many 'missing' Sindarin and [[Quenya]] words, all of them based on existing words, and grammatically and semantically fitting in with the known material. Since the other languages used in the movies, [[Khuzdul]] and the [[Black Speech]], were not really developed, Salo created entire new languages which fit in with the known words, often called ''neo-Khuzdul'' and ''neo-Black speech'' to set them apart from Tolkien's original languages.

From a post by Salo on the [[Elfling]] list:
{{Blockquote|Why is there Elvish in the movie? Why did [[Peter Jackson]] care enough to strive for some accuracy in the way language is presented? (&#8230;) The Elvish in the movie is addressed to the minority of viewers who know something about the languages. And what are they going to want to do when they hear the Elvish sentences?  They're going to want to figure out what they mean, and *why* they mean what they mean. Part of *my* intention, my particular vision and contribution to this movie, was to create sentences which would be intelligible to the people who study the languages (&#8230;) I'm enormously happy to see some people saying based on their knowledge of Elvish, great or small, that they recognized and understood some of what they heard on the screen. That's great - that's *exactly* the kind of effect that I was looking for.|Salo, [https://tolkienlistsearch.herokuapp.com/message/5e9c35c83c89229f99f27591 Elfling message 87.22]}}

==Bibliography==

===Books===
* [[2004]]: ''[[A Gateway to Sindarin]]''

===Articles===
* [[1995]]: ''[[Tyalië Tyelelliéva 7]]''
** "Commentary on [[Fíriel's song|Firiel's Song]]"
* [[1996]]: ''[[Tyalië Tyelelliéva 9]]''
** "Catamando Lire Mincarme"
* [[1997]]: ''[[Tyalië Tyelelliéva 10]]''
** "The Book of Mazarbul as an example of book-making in Middle-earth"
* [[1997]]: ''[[Tyalië Tyelelliéva 11]]''
** "Legolas' Song of Lebennin"
* [[1998]]: ''[[Tyalië Tyelelliéva 12]]''
** "Development of 'Galadriel's Lament'"
* [[2000]]:  [[Other Hands 28|''Other Hands'' #28]]
** "A History of the Nandor"
** "A Grammar and Dictionary of Silvan Elvish"

===Other contributions===
*[[1997]]: ''[[Hands of the Healer]]'' (linguistic contribution)

==External links==
*[https://web.archive.org/web/20190126115532/http://midgardsmal.com/ Midgardsmal - David Salo's blog] (archived version, Archive.org) 

{{references}}

{{DEFAULTSORT:Salo, David}}
[[Category:American people]]
[[Category:Authors]]
[[Category:Linguists]]
[[Category:People by name]]

[[de:David Salo]]
[[fi:David Salo]]