{{author infobox
| image=
| name=Diana Glyer
| born=[[January]] [[1956]]
| died=
| education=University of Illinois at Chicago
| occupation=Professor of English
| location=California, U.S.A.
| website=[http://www.dianaglyer.com Official website]
|}}'''Dr. Diana Pavlac Glyer''' ([[January]] [[1956]]) is a professor in the Department of English and in the Honors College at [[wikipedia:Azusa Pacific University|Azusa Pacific University]]. Dr. Glyer received her Ph.D. from the [[wikipedia:University of Illinois at Chicago|University of Illinois at Chicago]] and now lives in California. 

==Life==
Glyer was introduced to the [[Inklings]] in high school. She read ''[[The Lord of the Rings]]'', and became interested in the friendship of [[J.R.R. Tolkien]] and [[C.S. Lewis]]. She would spend twenty years researching their relationship, focusing mainly on completeness of primary sources. 

In 1997, Glyer received the ''[[Clyde S. Kilby]] Research Grant''. This endowed award is presented annually by the Steering Committee of the [http://www.wheaton.edu/wadecenter/ Marion E. Wade Center] to a scholar engaged in a publishable project related to one of the seven authors on which the Center focuses. The intention of the award is both to recognize scholarly contributions and also to assist the work of those who use the resources of the Wade Center. This grant allowed her to publish ''[[The Company They Keep: C.S. Lewis and J.R.R. Tolkien as Writers in Community]]'' in [[2006]].

==Bibliography==
===Books===
* [[2006]]: ''[[The Company They Keep: C.S. Lewis and J.R.R. Tolkien as Writers in Community]]''
* [[2015]]: ''[[Bandersnatch: C.S. Lewis, J.R.R. Tolkien, and the Creative Collaboration of the Inklings]]''

===Articles===
* [[1995]]: ''[[Proceedings of the J.R.R. Tolkien Centenary Conference]]''
** "More Than a Bandersnatch: The Influence of the Inklings on Tolkien's Middle-Earth"
* [[2003]]: ''[[Tollers and Jack: A Comparative Look at the Lives and works of J.R.R. Tolkien and C.S. Lewis]]''
** Foreword
* [[2007]]: [[Mythlore 99/100|''Mythlore'' 99/100]]
** "The Centre of the Inklings: Lewis? Tolkien? Barfield? Williams?"
* [[2007]]: [[Mythcon 37]]
** "Adept at Scholarship: Allies and Obstacles in the Field of Inklings Studies"

==Awards==
* [[2008]] - '''[[Mythopoeic Society|Mythopoeic Scholarship Award in Inklings Studies]]''' - ''The Company They Keep''
* [[2007]] - '''[[Imperishable Flame Award]]''', Tolkien/Inklings Scholarship, ''The Company They Keep''

==See also==
* [[Interviews/Diana Glyer (4-16-07)|Interview with Diana Glyer]] at [[The Children of Húrin Release Party]]

==External links==
* '''[http://www.dianaglyer.com Official website]'''
* [http://www.tolkienlibrary.com/press/The_Company_They_Keep.php Interview] at [[Pieter Collier|Tolkienlibrary.com]]

{{DEFAULTSORT:Glyer, Diana}}
[[Category:American people]]
[[Category:Authors]]
[[Category:People by name]]