{{Rewrite}}
{{film infobox
| image = Diari dalla terza Era - poster.jpeg
| caption = 
| name = Diari dalla Terza Era
| director = Claudio Ripalti
| producer = Claudio Ripalti
| writer = '''Novel:'''<br>[[J.R.R. Tolkien]]<br>'''Screenplay:'''<br>Claudio Ripalti<br>
| narrator = 
| starring = Alessandro Gabbianelli, Gualtiero Stipa, Alessandro Renz
| music = Enrico Ripalt
| cinematography = Mike Ritchie, Stein Stie
| editing = Elena Cancellieri
| distributor = 
| released = July 5, 2013
| runtime = 17:42
| country = Italy
| language = Italian
| budget = 1,400 euros
| website = [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3CGbVn2ffHA website]
| imdb_id = 1323925
}}'''Diari dalla Terza Era''' (Italian: '''Third Age Journals''') is a [[:Category:Fan films|fan film]] that was made released in July 2013. The film can be downloaded online for free.<!--The soundtracks are still up on their youtube channel however the film itself seems to have been privated, another link if possible should be found.-->
==Synopsis==
{{Expansion}}
Diari dalla Terza Era takes place between the events of [[The Lord of the Rings]] and [[The Silmarillion]] specifically in {{TA|1975}} during the fall of Kingdom of [[Angmar]].

The film follows a [[Men|Man]] known as "Il Campione" (Italian:The Champion) who pursues the [[Witch-King|Witch-King of Angmar]] despite [[Glorfindel]]'s prophecy which states:
{{Blockquote|He will not return to this land.  Far off yet is his doom, and not by the hand of man will he fall.|Glorfindel, ''[[The Return of the King]]'', [[Appendix A]] (iv)}}
==Production==
Diari dalla Terza Era is based on [[The Lord of the Rings]] and [[The Silmarillion]], specifically the chapter [[Of the Rings of Power and the Third Age]]. It was an independent, non-profit production shot in April and May 2013 with a budget of 1,400 euros.<ref>{{webcite|author=Robert Arduini|articleurl=https://www.jrrtolkien.it/fandom/cinema/film-diari-dalla-terza-era/|articlename=Film: Diari dalla Terza Era|dated=24 July 2013|website=[https://www.jrrtolkien.it/ jrrtolkien.it]|accessed=29 January 2024}}</ref> Filming took place in The Castle of Piandimeleto, Monte Catria, Monte Acuto, Parco di Cesane in Urbino and Gola del Furlo.<ref>{{webcite|author=Aragorn II|articleurl=https://elanillounico.com/noticias/peliculas/diari-dalla-terza-era-fanfilm-italiano-inspirado-en-el-senor-de-los-anillos/|articlename=Diari dalla Terza Era, fanfilm italiano inspirado en El Señor de los Anillos|dated=13 November|website=[https://elanillounico.com/ elanillounico.com]|accessed=29 January 2024}}</ref>
==Cast==
==Crew==
Directed by: Claudio Ripalti.<br>
Written by: Claudio Ripalti and Daniela Cancellieri.<br>
Screenplay by: Claudio Ripalti, Daniela Cancellieri.<br>
Producer: Claudio Ripalti, Daniela Cancellieri.<br>
Costumes by: Daniela Cancellieri.<br>
Casting: Daniela Cancellieri with Alessandro Gabbianelli and Gualtiero Stipa.<br>
Music by: Enrico Ripalti (Based on music by [[Howard Shore]]).

{{References}}

==External links==
*[http://tolkienbrasil.com/videos/fanmade/fan-filme-diario-da-terceira-era/ Diari dalla terza Era] at [http://www.tolkienbrasil.com TolkienBrasil]

{{Fan films}}

[[Category:Fan films|Diari dalla terza Era]]