{{website
| name=Digital Tolkien Project
| image=
| URL=https://digitaltolkien.com
| slogan= A scholarly project focused on Tolkien from both a corpus linguistic and digital humanities perspective
| commercial=No
| revenue=
| type=
| language=English
| license=
| articlecount=
| registration=
| owner=
| creator=[[James Tauber]]
| keypeople=
| launch=
| status=Active
}}
The '''Digital Tolkien Project''' (often abbreviated as DTP) is a scholarly project focused on [[J.R.R. Tolkien]] from both a corpus linguistic and digital humanities perspective. Started and run by [[James Tauber]], the project has collaborated with various Tolkien scholars and is supported by many volunteers. The main and ongoing work at the project is [[Wikipedia:XML|XML]] markup of Tolkien's work to allow them to be used for computer-assisted analysis. The DTP also works to create a thorough citation scheme that allows specific paragraphs to be cited, and differentiates the words of J.R.R. Tolkien from the commentary of an editor, such as [[Christopher Tolkien]]. 

Among the projects of the DTP is the goal to identify the textual variations within the various print editions of ''[[The Silmarillion]]'', as well as to trace the development of the legendarium through the various iterations found in ''[[The History of Middle-earth]]'' series and allow for easy comparison between versions over time. On the Digital Tolkien Twitter account as well as on the [https://delvings.digitaltolkien.com/ Little Delvings] page, the DTP shares interesting charts and graphs with information about the texts.

The [https://search.digitaltolkien.com/?terms= '''Search Tolkien'''] feature allows users to find words or strings of words in many of the works and letters of J.R.R. Tolkien. It also shows the relative frequency of the term found in the text.<ref>https://twitter.com/DigitalTolkien/status/1629917821521084417</ref>

The [https://glossary.digitaltolkien.com/ '''Glossary'''] tool allows users to see what books a word occurs in, search by tags such as language, reading level, grammatical features, and whether or not it appears in [[The Ring of Words]].<ref>https://glossary.digitaltolkien.com/entry/mithril.html</ref> 

In [[2025]], the site won the [[Tolkien Society Awards| Tolkien Society Award]] for Best Online Content. <ref> [https://www.tolkiensociety.org/2025/04/winners-of-the-tolkien-society-awards-2025-announced/ Winners of the Tolkien Society Awards 2025 Announced] (accessed 27 April 2025) </ref>



==External links==
* [https://digitaltolkien.com Official website]
* [https://www.youtube.com/@digitaltolkien/ Digital Tolkien Youtube]

{{references}}

[[Category:Websites]]