{{unnamed}}
{{battle
| name=Disaster of the Morannon
| image = Olanda Fong-Surdenas - Easterling.jpg
| conflict=[[Wainrider/Balchoth War]]
| date=[[12 July]] {{TA|1944}}
| place=[[Ithilien]], [[Morannon]]
| result=Victory for the Wainriders
| side1=[[Gondor]], [[Éothéod]]
| side2=[[Wainriders]], [[Haradrim]], [[Khand]]
| commanders1=[[Ondoher]] †
*[[Artamir]] †
*[[Minohtar]] †
*[[Adrahil (Captain of the Left Wing)|Adrahil]] 
*[[Leader of the Éothéod]]
| commanders2=Unknown 
| forces1=
| forces2=
| casual1=Severe, including prince [[Faramir (son of Ondoher)|Faramir]]
|casual2=Probably moderate
|}}

The '''disaster of the Morannon''' was a battle on 12 July {{TA|1944}} in which King [[Ondoher]] of [[Gondor]] attempted to rout the northern alliance of [[Wainriders]].<ref name="Northmen">{{UT|Northmen}}</ref>

==Events Prior to the Battle== 
After previous defeats, the Wainriders prepared for revenge. [[Easterlings]] allied with [[Haradrim]] and [[Men]] of [[Khand]], and attacked Gondor from two sides from the east and from the south.<ref name="Northmen" />

[[Forthwini]] of [[Éothéod]] informed the King that the Wainriders had recovered from their fears and weaknesses. Ondoher also learned that Gondor's southern enemies were preparing to attack. He raised as great an army as he could to meet the double threat. Ondoher divided his strength into two armies, assigning the smaller [[Southern Army]] to [[Eärnil]] at Pelargir. Ondoher himself took command of the larger [[Northern Army]] himself, which included his elder son [[Artamir]] at the Center; his sister-son [[Minohtar]] was assigned the position of Captain of the Right Wing; [[Adrahil (Captain of the Left Wing)|Adrahil]] of [[Dol Amroth]] was the Captain of the Left Wing. The Éothéod also sent a force.<ref name="Northmen" />
 
==The Battle==
The Haradrim invaded from the south and word reached [[Pelargir]] on [[9 July]]. A few days later on [[12 July]] word came of the Wainriders invading from the east.<ref name="Northmen" /> 

Gondor's host headed north through Ithilien on the alliance of Wainriders, planning to deploy upon the [[Dagorlad]] and attempting to rout them once and for all from Gondor's northern borders. Minohtar followed the main force that included the [[King's Guard]]s as they approached the area in front of the [[Morannon]] on the morning of 12 July.<ref name="Northmen" />

However, the Wainriders and their allies, bitter from previous defeats, moved faster than expected along the outskirts of the [[Ered Lithui]] attacked them with vengeance. They sent forth a swift vanguard of horsemen and charioteers that struck the head of the moving army. Ondoher had just enough time to send a message to Minohtar to cover his left flank before he and his son, with most of the King's Guard, were annihilated.<ref name="Northmen" />

Minohtar then took command of the army, rallying the remaining men of the Centre and deploying his own command. It was his intention to use his forces as a rearguard to attempt to halt the Wainriders, whose main host was now approaching.<ref name="Northmen" />

Minohtar odered Adrahil to withdraw the troops the Left Wing and the troops at the rear of the Ring Wing who had not yet participated in the battle south into Ithilien to form a defensive line from [[Cair Andros]] to the [[Ephel Dúath]] to cover the approaches of [[Minas Anor]] and allow Minohtar to form a rearguard and attempt to stem the advance of the Wainriders. In addition, Adrahil should send a message to [[Eärnil II|Eärnil]] of the Southern Army, and inform him of the disaster of the Morannon and of the position of the retreating Northern Army.<ref name="Northmen" />

Meanwhile, a party of Éothéod retreated to­wards the [[Dead Marshes]]. One of the soldiers who died was [[Faramir (son of Ondoher)|Faramir]], the Prince of Gondor, disguised in order to fight against the will of his father. The [[leader of the Éothéod]] went to join Minohtar at the head of the [[North Road]] in [[Ithilien]]. The Wainriders broke through Minohtar's position. Late on the 13th day of [[Cermië]] Minohtar was overwhelmed and slain by an arrow. His body was carried away with the rearguard as they fled to find Adrahil.<ref name="Northmen" />

==Aftermath==
After their victory in the battle, the Wainriders stopped their advance<ref name="Northmen" /> and held a feast in their camp.<ref name="Ondoher">{{App|Gondor}}, entry for king Ondoher, p. 1049</ref>

Gondor referred to the battle as "the disaster of the Morannon". It is unknown if the Wainriders gave quarter to King Ondoher's forces, though it is known that his army was almost entirely crushed. Some of his troops managed to escape, however, and fled southward where they joined up with Gondor's Southern Army, which quickly marched north to catch the Wainriders by surprise during their celebrations in the [[Battle of the Camp]].<ref name="Ondoher" />

{{references}}
[[Category:Conflicts of the Third Age]]
[[fi:Morannonin Tappio]]