{{Disambig-two|the land of [[Morgoth]] in the [[First Age]]|song by [[Summoning]]|[[Dor Daedeloth (song)]]}}{{kingdom
| image=Jonathan Guzi - Thangorodrim.jpg
| name=Dor Daedeloth
| caption="Thangorodrim" by [[:Category:Images by Jonathan Guzi|Jonathan Guzi]]
| pronun=
| othernames=''Dor-na-Daerachas'' ([[Sindarin|S]])
| location=Far north of [[Middle-earth]]
| capital=[[Angband]]
| towns=
| regions=
| population=[[Balrogs]], [[Orcs]], [[Werewolves]], and other creatures<br />Enslaved [[Noldor]]
| language=
| govern1=[[Morgoth]] as the [[Dark Lord]]
| govern2=[[Sauron]] as his Lieutenant
| govern3=[[Gothmog (balrog)|Gothmog]] as the High Captain
| currency=
| holiday=
| precededby=[[Utumno]]
| event1=Established
| event1date=Before {{YT|1090}}
| event2=Destroyed
| event2date={{FA|587}}, [[War of Wrath]]
| followedby=
}}
'''Dor Daedeloth''' was the land of [[Morgoth]] in the [[First Age]].
==Geography==
Dor Daedeloth was one of the three large regions of western Middle-earth, along with [[Beleriand]] and [[Hithlum]]. It lay all around the fortress of [[Angband]] and on both sides of the [[Ered Engrin]]. Its borders were the [[Ered Wethrin]] to the west, the [[Ered Luin]] to the east, and the [[Dorthonion]],  the [[Pass of Sirion]] and the [[March of Maedhros]] to the south. 

The Ered Engrin, an absolutely unclimbable chain, split the region in two separate parts. The southern part was [[Ard-galen]], the great grassy plain north of [[Beleriand]], later to become the desert of [[Anfauglith]] after the [[Dagor Bragollach]] had utterly burned it. The northern part was an unnamed region, cold and vast.

==History==
It was here, north of the mountains, that the [[Orcs]] and other creatures of Morgoth lived and bred.<ref name=S13>{{S|13}}</ref>

The march of the [[Noldor]] in the late [[First Age]] was halted there, when [[Fëanor]] was mortally wounded by the [[Balrogs]]. The Noldor then encircled the land (at least in the south), starting the [[Siege of Angband]].<ref name=S13/>

==Etymology==
In the published ''[[The Silmarillion|Silmarillion]]'', the name ''Dor Daedeloth'' is translated as "Land of the Shadow of Horror".<ref>{{S|Index}}, entry "Dor Daedeloth"</ref> In other sources it is spelled as '''''Dor-Daedeloth''''', and translated as "Land of Great Dread".<ref>{{WJ|Index}}, p. 435</ref>

[[Robert Foster]] notes that the name appears only in the chapter ''[[Of the Return of the Noldor]]'' and is not mentioned again after the [[Siege of Angband]].<ref>{{HM|Guide}}</ref>

==Other versions of the legendarium==
'''''Dor-Daideloth''''' was the name used for the region in early versions of the [[legendarium]].<ref>{{SM|Index}}, entry "Dor-Daideloth"</ref>

In [[J.R.R. Tolkien|Tolkien]]'s final writings, the name was changed on the primary map to '''''Dor-na-Daerachas'''''.<ref>{{HM|WJ}}, pp. 187, 338</ref>

{{references}}
[[Category:Beleriand]]
[[Category:Evil realms]]
[[Category:Sindarin locations]]

[[de:Dor Daedeloth]]
[[fi:Dor Daedeloth]]