{{people infobox
| name=Dwarves of Belegost
| image = Joona Kujanen - The Battle of Unnumbered Tears.jpg
| caption="The Battle of Unnumbered Tears" by [[:Category:Images by Joona Kujanen|Joona Kujanen]]
| pronun=
| othernames=
| origin=
| location=[[Belegost]], [[Blue Mountains]], [[Moria|Khazad-Dûm]]<ref name="Durin">{{App|Durin}}</ref>
| affiliation=[[Union of Maedhros]]
| rivalry=
| language=[[Khuzdul]], [[Sindarin]]
| members=[[Azaghâl]]
| lifespan=c. 250 years
| distinctions=
| height=Five feet or less
| hair=
| skin=
| clothing=
| weapons=
}}
The '''Dwarves of Belegost''' were a people of [[Dwarves]] who dwelt in the city of [[Belegost]], the northernmost of the two great Dwarf-cities that stood in the [[Blue Mountains]] during the [[First Age]]. With their cousins, the [[Dwarves of Nogrod]], they were among the [[Dwarves of the Blue Mountains]].
==History==
During the [[Years of the Trees]] the western [[Fathers of the Dwarves]] awoke from beneath the [[Blue Mountains]] creating the lines of the [[Broadbeams]] and the [[Firebeards]]. These two houses built the great Dwarven cities of [[Nogrod]] and Belegost in the Blue Mountains.<ref>{{PM|Dwarves}}</ref><ref group="note">It is not clear from the narratives whether each city belonged to either House, and whether the Dwarves of Belegost consisted of either Firebeards or Broadbeams; it is possible that members of both Houses dwelled in either city.</ref>

In smithing, the Dwarves of Belegost were second only to the Dwarves of Nogrod. They learned many secrets in smithing from the Elves, and Elves from the Dwarves. They created many weapons for the Elves when evil began to stir in [[Beleriand]], and the smiths of Belegost were the first to create linked ring mail.<ref>{{Cite DTP|id=S QS.10.010}}</ref>

They had generally better relations with the [[Elves]] than their neighbors in Nogrod; friends of the [[Sindar]], the Dwarves of Belegost were behind the building of [[Menegroth]].<ref name="Sindar">{{S|Sindar}}</ref> They first met the [[Noldor]] who came to [[Beleriand]] near [[Rerir|Mount Rerir]] and a great friendship began between the two peoples; [[Maedhros]] once saved Lord [[Azaghâl]] from an [[Orcs|Orc]]-assault.<ref>{{UT|Narn}}, p. 75</ref> They became their allies<ref>{{S|Noldor}}</ref>  and joined the [[Union of Maedhros]]. They fought bravely beside each other during the [[Nirnaeth Arnoediad]], where they lost their ruler Lord [[Azaghâl]] in battle to the dragon [[Glaurung]].<ref>{{Cite DTP|id=S QS.20.018}}</ref>

When the [[Dwarves of Nogrod]] assembled a great host of Dwarves to attack [[Doriath]], the Dwarves of Belegost tried to dissuade them from war, but their brethren from Nogrod did not heed their advice. These dwarves went on to fight a [[battle in the Thousand Caves]],<ref>{{S|Doriath}}</ref> and later met their demise the [[Battle of Sarn Athrad]].<ref>{{Cite DTP|id=S QS.22.041}}</ref> After this tragedy the Dwarves of Belegost started leaving for [[Moria|Khazad-dûm]], for fear of reprisal from the Elves. There was much loathing between Elf and Dwarf from there on.<ref name="Concerning">{{UT|Concerning}}</ref>

After the end of the [[First Age]], around {{SA|40}}, the power and wealth of Khazad-dûm was much increased; for it was enriched by many people and much lore and craft when the ancient cities of [[Nogrod]] and [[Belegost]] in the [[Blue Mountains]] were ruined in the breaking of [[Thangorodrim]].<ref name="Durin" /> However, there always remained some Dwarves on the eastern side of the Blue Mountains in days afterwards.<ref name="Concerning" />

==Other versions of the legendarium==
In ''[[The Book of Lost Tales]]'', the Dwarves of Belegost were known as the ''Indravangs''<ref name = "Tale">{{LT2|I}}</ref> or ''Indrafangs''<ref>{{BL|Names}}</ref> When [[Lúthien|Tinúviel]] sung the [[Lengthening spell]], she mentioned the tallest and longest things on the Earth. Among those mentioned was 'the beards of the Indravangs.'<ref name = "Tale"></ref> 

==Portrayal in adaptations==
'''1982-97: ''[[Middle-earth Role Playing]]'':'''
:The Dwarves of Belegost are called '''Thrár's Tribe'''.<ref>{{ICE|8004}}</ref><ref>[[Thomas Morwinsky]], "A Brief History of the Dwarven Mansions", in ''[[Other Minds]]'' issue 4 (July 2008)</ref>

{{References|n}}
[[Category:Dwarven peoples]]
[[de:Belegost]]
[[fi:Belegost]]