{{infobox character
| people=[[Arnor]]ian
| name=Dírhael
| image=Born of Hope - Dírhael.jpg
| caption=Dírhael from ''[[Born of Hope]]''
| pronun=
| othernames=
| titles=
| position=
| location=[[Eriador]]
| affiliation=
| language=''Presumably'' [[Sindarin]] and [[Westron]]
| birth=Late [[Third Age]]
| birthlocation=
| rule=
| death=
| deathlocation=
| age=
| notablefor=
| house=[[House of Isildur]]
| parentage=Unknown<sup>[[Dírhael#Other versions of the legendarium|NB]]</sup> (descendant of [[Aranarth]])
| siblings=
| spouse=[[Ivorwen]]
| children=[[Gilraen]]
| gender=Male
| height=
| hair=
| eyes=
| clothing=
| weapons=
| steed=
}}
'''Dírhael''' was a [[Dúnedain of Arnor|Dúnadan]] that was descended from [[Aranarth]], the first [[Chieftains of the Dúnedain|Chieftain of the Dúnedain]],<ref>{{App|Eriador}}, ''The North-kingdom and the Dúnedain'', paragraph after the entry for King Arvedui, p. 1043</ref> and the maternal grandfather of [[Aragorn]].<ref name=Tale>{{App|Tale}}, p. 1057</ref>

== History ==
Dírhael was married to [[Ivorwen]] and had a daughter called [[Gilraen]].<ref name=Tale/> They lived in a hidden refuge in the wilds of [[Eriador]],<ref name=Arwen>{{PM|Aii}}, manuscript A, p. 263</ref> possibly in the [[Angle]].

When [[Arathorn II|Arathorn]], the son of the [[Chieftains of the Dúnedain|Chieftain of the Dúnedain]] [[Arador]], wished to wed [[Gilraen]], Gilraen's father Dírhael was against this marriage, because Gilraen was still too young for marriage according to the customs of the Dúnedain and he foresaw that Arathorn would be Chieftain soon and would only have a short life.

Ivorwen, however, also had the gift of foresight, and persuaded her husband to allow the marriage by saying that the days were darkening before the storm, and that [[Estel|hope]] might be born for the Dúnedain if Arathorn wedded Gilraen now instead of delaying the marriage.<ref name=Tale/>

In {{TA|2929}} his daughter Gilraen married Arathorn.<ref>{{App|TA}}, entry for the year 2929, p. 1089</ref> Arador was slain one year after the marriage in [[TA|2930]]<ref>{{App|TA}}, entry for the year 2930, p. 1089</ref> and Dírhael's son-in-law became Chieftain of the Dúnedain.<ref>{{App|North}}, ''Chieftains'', Arathorn II, p. 1038</ref> One year later, in [[TA|2931]],<ref>{{App|TA}}, entry for the year 2931, p. 1089</ref> [[Aragorn]], the son of Arathorn and Gilraen was born. Only two years after the birth of Aragorn, Arathorn was likewise slain in [[TA|2933]].<ref name=Tale/><ref>{{App|TA}}, entry for the year 2933, p. 1089</ref>

== Etymology ==
The name ''Dírhael'' is in [[Sindarin]]. Its meaning is not glossed, but [[Paul Strack]] suggests it means "Wise Man" according to [[David Salo]], being a compound of ''[[dîr]]'' ("man") and ''hael'', a [[lenition|lenited]] form of ''[[sael]]'' ("wise").<ref>{{webcite|author=Paul Strack|articleurl=http://eldamo.org/content/words/word-889282965.html|articlename=S. ''Dírhael'' m.|website=Eldamo|accessed=04 September 2022}}</ref>

== Genealogy ==
{{familytree/start}}
{{familytree | | | HOS | | | | | | |HOS=''[[House of Isildur]]''}}
{{familytree | | | |:| | | | | | | |}}
{{familytree | | | |:| | | | | | | |}}
{{familytree | | | ARA | | | | HOU |ARA=[[Arathorn I]]<br/><small>''{{TA|2693|n}} - {{TA|2848|n}}''†</small>|HOU=''[[House of Isildur]]''}}
{{familytree | |,|-|^|-|.| | | |:| |}}
{{familytree | ARG | | UNK | | GIL |ARG=[[Argonui]]<br/><small>''{{TA|2757|n}} - {{TA|2912|n}}''</small>|GIL=[[Gilbarad]]<br/><small>''b. {{TA}}''</small>|UNK=''unknown<br />child''<sup>[[Dírhael#Other versions of the legendarium|NB]]</sup>}}
{{familytree | |!| | | |:| | | |!| |}}
{{familytree | ARA | | DIR |y| IVO |ARA=[[Arador]]<br/><small>''{{TA|2820|n}} - {{TA|2930|n}}''†</small>|DIR='''DÍRHAEL'''<br/><small>''b. {{TA}}''</small>|IVO=[[Ivorwen]]<br/><small>''b. {{TA}}''</small>}}
{{familytree | |!| | | | | |!| | | |}}
{{familytree | ATH |~|y|~| GIR | | |ATH=[[Arathorn II]]<br/><small>''{{TA|2873|n}} - {{TA|2933|n}}''†</small>|GIR=[[Gilraen]]<br/><small>''{{TA|2907|n}} - {{TA|3007|n}}''</small>}}
{{familytree | | | | |!| | | | | | |}}
{{familytree | | | | ELE | | | | | |ELE=[[Aragorn II]] '''Elessar'''<br/><small>''{{TA|2931}} - {{FoA|120}}''</small>}}
{{familytree/end}}

== Other versions of the legendarium ==
In the earlier manuscript versions of what would later become Appendix A and Appendix B, Dírhael's name was ''Dirhael'', before being changed to ''Dirhoel'',<ref name=Arwen/> and finally to ''Dírhael''.<ref>{{PM|Third}}, manuscript T 4, The Third Age, entry for the year 2929</ref>

Earlier manuscript versions of what would later become Appendix A mention that he was a descendant of Arathorn I "by a younger branch",<ref>{{PM|Elendil}}, manuscript C, ''End of the North Kingdom'', 40. 15. Arathorn II, p. 196</ref> or that he we was of the blood of Isildur, but not of the "right line of the Heirs".<ref name=Arwen/> Based on the ages of Gilraen, Arathorn II and Arador, it is possible that Dírhael was the great-grandson of Arathorn I.

{{references}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:Dirhael}}
[[Category:House of Isildur]]
[[Category:Sindarin names]]
[[Category:Third Age characters]]
[[de:Dírhael]]
[[fr:encyclo/personnages/hommes/3a/dunedain/dunedain du nord/dirhael]]
[[fi:Dírhael]]