{{people infobox
| name=Dúnedain
| image=
| caption=
| pronun=[[Sindarin|S]], {{IPA|[ˈduːnedaɪn]}}
| othernames=Great People of the West, Men of the Ancient Houses, Men of the West, Men of Westernesse
| origin=Descendants of the [[Númenoreans]] in [[Middle-earth]]
| location=[[Eriador]], [[Arnor]], [[Gondor]]
| affiliation=[[Last Alliance of Elves and Men]], [[Host of the West (Arnor)|Host of the West]], [[Grey Company]]
| rivalry=[[Sauron]]
| language=[[Westron]], [[Sindarin]], [[Quenya]] 
| members=[[Argeleb I]], [[Aragorn II]], [[Denethor]], [[Boromir]], [[Faramir]], [[Imrahil]], [[Morwen Steelsheen]]
| lifespan=''[[#Waning of the Dúnedain|See below]]''
| distinctions=Superior to the other Men of [[Middle-earth]] in nobility of spirit and body
| height=About 6'4"<ref name=height>{{UT|Linear}}</ref>
| hair=Dark
| skin=Pale
| clothing=
| weapons=
}}
{{quote|Where now are the Dúnedain, Elessar, Elessar?<br />Why do thy kinsfolk wander afar?|[[Galadriel's messages]]}}

The '''Dúnedain''' ([[Sindarin|S]]: "West-men"), singular '''Dúnadan''', were the [[Men of Númenor]] and their descendants who peopled the [[Westlands]] of [[Middle-earth]] in the [[Second Age|Second]] and [[Third Age]]s.<ref group=note>[[J.R.R. Tolkien]] uses the terms ''Númenoreans'' and ''Dúnedain'' interchangeably; for clarity, [[Tolkien Gateway]] interprets the term '''Númenor'''eans literally, as those Dúnedain who were actually living ''on'' Númenor during the Second Age, whereas this article treats the race of Dúnedain in general (in Middle-earth and the Third Age).</ref>

Although they were from the beginning far fewer in number than the [[Middle Men|lesser men]], the Dúnedain were lords of long life, great power, and wisdom; far superior to the [[Middle Men|Men of Middle-earth]] among whom they dwelt and whom they ruled.<ref name=languages/>

==History==
===Early History===
The Dúnedain descend from the [[Edain]] of the [[First Age]], having been granted the island of [[Númenor]] in the [[Second Age]]. Many [[Men of Númenor]] settled in [[Middle-earth]], such as in [[Belfalas]], [[Umbar]] and [[Pelargir]]. The ancestors of the [[Princes of Dol Amroth]], were the most prominent of these.<ref name="Cirion">{{UT|Cirion}}</ref>

After the [[Downfall of Númenor]], [[Elendil]] and his sons led the [[Exiles of Númenor|Exiles]] to Middle-earth. Many who were in whole or part of [[Númenorean]] blood welcomed them and proceeded to found the [[Realms in Exile]], [[Arnor]] and [[Gondor]].<ref name=languages>{{App|Men}}</ref><ref name=rings>{{s|Rings}}</ref> 

Originally ruled by their [[High King (Dúnedain)|High King]], they were divided as the [[Dúnedain of Arnor]] and the [[Dúnedain of Gondor]], following the death of [[Isildur]], son of [[Elendil]], in {{TA|2}}.<ref name=rings/><ref name="AppB">{{App|B2}}</ref>

===Division===
====In Arnor====
{{Seealso|Dúnedain of Arnor}}
[[Valandil (King of Arnor)|Valandil]], [[Isildur]]'s youngest son, took up his rule in [[Annúminas]], but his people were diminished, and there were too few [[Númenoreans]] and native [[Men of Eriador]] to people the land or maintain the places [[Elendil]] built; many had died in the [[War of the Last Alliance]] and the [[Disaster of the Gladden Fields]].<ref name=rings/>

After the reign of [[Eärendur]], the seventh king that followed [[Valandil]], the [[Dúnedain of the North]] became divided into petty realms and lordships, and the witch-realm of [[Angmar]] destroyed them one by one.<ref name=rings/><ref name=eriador>{{App|Eriador}}</ref>

The remnants of the [[Northern Dúnedain]] were also heavily affected by the [[Great Plague]]; the joint garrison (of the North and South Kingdoms) at [[Tharbad]] ceased to exist,<ref>{{UT|6d}}</ref> and the last of the Dúnedain of [[Cardolan]] died on the [[Barrow-downs]].<ref name=eriador/>

After the [[Angmar War]], the [[Dúnedain of the North]] were reduced to [[Ranger of the North|Rangers]] wandering secretly in the wild, and their heritage was forgotten, save in [[Imladris]], where the [[Heir of Isildur|Heirs of Isildur]] were harboured and their line, from father to son, remained unbroken.<ref name=rings/><ref name=eriador/>

====In Gondor====
{{Seealso|Dúnedain of Gondor}}
In the south, the realm of [[Gondor]] endured and the splendour and might of the [[Dúnedain of the South]] grew, until it resembled the wealth and majesty of [[Númenor]] during the reign of [[Hyarmendacil I]].<ref name=rings/><ref name="AppB"/><ref name=gondor>{{App|Gondor}}</ref>

However, in the later [[Third Age]], the [[Dúnedain of Gondor]] waned for their blood became much mingled with that of other men, especially the [[Northmen of Rhovanion]]. King [[Eldacar (King of Gondor)|Eldacar]], who himself had [[Northmen|Northmannish]] blood, showed favour to the [[Northmen]] who supported him. This led to the [[Kin-strife]], when many of the [[Dúnedain of Gondor]] were slain. After his return from exile, many noble houses, including the royal [[House of Anárion]], became more mingled with the blood of "lesser" Men.<ref name=gondor/>

After the reign of King [[Eärnur]], royal descendants among the [[Dúnedain of Gondor]] had become few and no claimant for the throne could be found of pure [[Númenórean]] blood, or whose claim all would accept, and people were afraid of a new [[Kin-strife]] that would devastate the kingdom. Thus, by default, [[Mardil]] began the line of [[Ruling Stewards of Gondor]].<ref name=rings/><ref name=gondor/>

After the [[Stewards]] picked up the southern rule, the remnant of the [[Dúnedain of Gondor]] still defended the passage of the [[Anduin]] against the terrors of [[Minas Morgul]] and against all the enemies of the West.<ref name=rings/>

By the time of the [[War of the Ring]], the [[Dúnedain of Gondor]] lived in [[Minas Tirith]] and the adjacent townlands, as well as the tributary fiefs and royal lands of [[Anórien]], [[Ithilien]], and [[Belfalas]].<ref name=languages/><ref name="Language">{{PM|Languages}}</ref>

===Reunification===
Upon the conclusion of the [[War of the Ring]], the [[Kingdoms of the Dúnedain]] were [[Reunited Kingdom|reunited]] under [[Aragorn II Elessar]], [[Isildur's Heir]], and their glory was renewed.<ref name=rings/>

==Characteristics==
===Appearance===
They were tall, pale-skinned, with dark hair, shining grey eyes, and proud faces.<ref name="Herbs">{{TT|Herbs}}</ref><ref name="Minas Tirith">{{RK|V1}}</ref><ref name="Sign">{{FR|Sign}}</ref> Although the stature of those with [[Númenóreans|Númenórean]] descent decreased from what it once was (more than 2 [[ranga]]), the Dúnedain were still about 2 [[ranga]] or 6'4" on average.<ref name=height>{{UT|Linear}}</ref>

===Waning of the Dúnedain===
The [[Third Age]] marked the beginning of the waning of the Dúnedain, in which their gifts of wisdom, nobility, and long life were slowly withdrawn due to the [[Downfall of Númenor]] and their mingling with [[Middle Men|lesser men]].<ref name=gondor/> 

In the beginning of their history, the Dúnedain were blessed with a lifespan thrice the life of [[Middle Men|lesser men]], yet this ever-diminished over the course of the [[Third Age]].<ref name=languages/><ref name=eriador/> 

In [[Arnor]], the strife and dissensions between the kingdoms of [[Arthedain]], [[Cardolan]], and [[Rhudaur]] hastened the waning of the Dúnedain.<ref name=eriador/> "More swift was the waning in the [[Arnor|North-kingdom]], for [[Eriador]] became colder and there, the Dúnedain became ever less".<ref>{{PM|Third}}, p. 227</ref> The Dúnedain of Arnor, unlike their [[Gondorians|kin to the South]], were of unmingled [[Númenóreans|Númenórean]] blood.<ref name=blood>{{VT|42a}}, pp. 11-3</ref> Although, their lifespans ever continued to shorten, the [[Dúnedain of Arnor]], especially their [[Chieftain of the Dúnedain|Chieftains]], maintained significant longevity living to twice the age of [[Middle Men|lesser men]].<ref name=eriador/><ref>{{PM|Second}}</ref> The [[Heir of Isildur|Heirs of Isildur]] even lived up to 160 years or more.<ref name=Tale>{{PM|Aii}}, p. 263</ref>

After [[Gondor]]'s numbers were replenished by lesser [[Northmen]] after the [[Kin-Strife]], the mingling did not at first hasten the waning of the Dúnedain, as had been feared, but it still proceeded little by little as it had before.<ref name=gondor/> However, after the fall of the [[Kings of Gondor|Kings]], the waning was much swifter in [[Gondor]] than in [[Arnor]].<ref name=eriador/> In fact, [[Hador (Steward of Gondor)|Hador]] the seventh [[Ruling Steward]] of [[Gondor]] was the last [[Gondorian]] to live 150 years and after his time the life-span of those with [[Númenóreans|Númenórean]] blood waned more rapidly.<ref name="Elendil">{{PM|Elendil}}</ref> By the time of the [[War of the Ring]], few among the [[Gondorians]] passed 100 years with vigour, except in the more pure and noble houses.<ref>{{RK|Houses}}</ref>

Upon the reunification of the [[Kingdoms of the Dúnedain]], the might and dignity of the Dúnedain was lifted up and their glory was renewed.<ref name=rings/> Greatest among them was their [[High King (Dúnedain)|High King]] [[Aragorn II Elessar]] who lived up to 210 years (the longest since King [[Arvegil]]),<ref name=eriador/> and he received in some measure their former gifts. He wedded [[Arwen Undomiel]], daughter of [[Elrond]], brother of [[Elros]] first [[King of Númenor|King of Númenór]], and so restored the majesty and high lineage of the royal [[House of Telcontar]], but their life-span was not restored and continued to wane until it became as that of other men.<ref name="Elendil"/>

==Language==
After the [[Downfall of Númenor|Downfall]], [[Sindarin]] was the regular spoken tongue of the [[Exiles of Númenor]].<ref>{{UT|7}}, note 16</ref> When they arrived on the coasts of [[Middle-earth]], few among the colonists on the coasts remembered [[Sindarin]] since the neglected [[Adûnaic]] was used as a ''lingua franca'' among the [[Men]] of [[Middle-earth]], which developed into the [[Westron]] tongue.<ref name=languages/><ref name=Atani>{{PM|Atani}}</ref> They used  the [[Common Speech]] in their dealings with other folk and in their governmental affairs. They enlarged the language and enriched it with many words from the Elven-tongues. In the days of the Númenorean kings, [[Westron]] became used more and more by the Dúnedain themselves.<ref name=languages/>

Among the Dúnedain, "the kings and high lords, and indeed all those of [[Númenóreans|Númenórean]] blood in any degree," for long used [[Númenórean Sindarin|Sindarin]].<ref>{{PM|Languages}}, p. 34</ref> Many of the [[Men of Gondor]] could also speak the [[Elvish]] tongues, a notable distinction and characteristic among the Dúnedain there.<ref name=languages/> [[Sindarin]] had long ceased to be a "first language" in [[Gondor]], but was learned in early youth (by the Dúnedain) from loremasters, and used by them as a mark of rank and high-blood. For example, the [[Stewards of Gondor]] belonged to a [[House of Húrin|noble family of Dúnedain]] of the ancient [[Faithful]] who used (beside the [[Common Speech]]) the [[Númenórean Sindarin]] tongue after the fashion of [[Gondor]]. It had changed very little since the [[Downfall of Númenor]] and though the [[Men of Gondor]] altered some of the sounds, they could still understand the [[Elves]] and be understood by them.<ref name="Elendil"/> [[Westron]] became used more and more by the [[Dúnedain of Gondor]] themselves, so that at the time of the [[War of the Ring]], [[Sindarin]] was known to only a small part of the peoples of [[Gondor]] (and spoken daily by fewer); they dwelt mostly in [[Minas Tirith]] and the adjacent townlands, and in the land of the tributary princes of [[Dol Amroth]].<ref name=languages/> 

[[Quenya]] was used by the Dúnedain, a tradition which has continued from the loremasters of [[Númenor]], to be used for places of fame and reverence in addition to the names of royalty and men of great renown.<ref name=languages/><ref name="quenya">{{L|347}}</ref> All the royal names of the [[Kings of Gondor]] as well as all the [[Stewards]] until [[Mardil Voronwë]] were [[Quenya]] names.<ref name=languages/><ref>{{App|South}}</ref> All the royal names of the [[Kings of Arnor]] were [[Quenya]] names. The [[Kings of Arthedain]] and later the [[Chieftain of the Dúnedain|Chieftains of the Dúnedain]], however, took [[Sindarin]] names.<ref name=North>{{App|North}}</ref> At the end of the [[Third Age]], there were more Men (being of Dúnedain descent) that knew [[Quenya]] or spoke [[Sindarin]] than there were [[Elves]] (those of [[Lindon]], [[Rivendell]], and [[Lórien]]) who did either.<ref name="quenya"/>

==Etymology==
{{Pronounce|Dunedain.mp3|Ardamir}}
{{quote|I thought you knew enough [[Elvish]] at least to know ''[[dûn|dún]]-[[adan]]'': Man of the West, Númenórean.|[[Bilbo Baggins]] in ''[[The Fellowship of the Ring]]'', "[[Many Meetings]]"}}

They are also called the ''Men of the West'' and the ''Men of Westernesse'' (direct translations of the [[Sindarin]] term).

The [[Quenya]] name was '''Núnatan''' (pron. {{IPA|[ˈnuːnatan]}}), pl. '''Núnatani''' (pron. {{IPA|[nuːˈnatani]}}).

The [[Westron]] name for ''Dúnadan'' was simply '''[[Adûn]]''', "westerner", but this name was seldom used.

''[[The Silmarillion]]'' is explicit in noting that "Númenoreans" and "Dúnedain" are synonymous terms. Nevertheless, it seems more usual to call those born in [[Númenor]] "'''Númenoreans'''" and their descendants living in [[Middle-earth]] post-[[Akallabêth]] "'''Dúnedain'''".

==See also==
*[[Black Númenóreans]]

== External links ==
* [http://www.zarkanya.net/Tolkien/Decline%20of%20the%20Numenoreans_original.htm Decline of the Lifespan of the Númenóreans] and [http://www.zarkanya.net/Tolkien/Stewards_and_Dol_Amroth.htm The Lifespans of the Ruling Stewards of Gondor and the Lords of Dol Amroth], by Alcuin

{{references|n}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:Dunedain}}
[[Category:Dúnedain| ]]
[[Category:Pronounced articles]]
[[Category:Sindarin demonyms]]
[[de:Dúnedain]]
[[fr:encyclo:peuples:hommes:dunedain]]
[[fi:Dúnedain]]