{{website
| name=Eldamo
| image=
| URL=http://eldamo.org/index.html
| slogan=An Elvish Lexicon
| alexa=
| commercial=No
| type=
| language=English (Includes [http://eldamo.org/translations/international-searches.html optional glosses in Russian and Polish])
| license=
| articlecount=
| registration=
| owner=[[Paul Strack]]
| creator=
| keypeople=
| launch=[[2008]]
| status=Active <br />(last version 0.8.4.2 — generated [[11 December]] [[2022]])
}}
'''Eldamo''' ('''''El'''vish '''Da'''ta '''Mo'''del''), or '''An Elvish Lexicon''', is a linguistic website launched in [[2008]], compiling a lexicon of Tolkien's invented [[languages]]. The website is maintained by Paul Strack and, despite its name, does include all of Tolkien's languages, not only the [[Eldarin]] family.

The website does not only work as a dictionary, but as a full lexicon that analyzes the relationships between words and the conceptual development of Tolkien's languages through his lifetime. Therefore the invented languages are divided by three periods: Early (1910–30), Middle (1930–50) and Late (1950–73). The entries are extensively sourced. 

It also contains a detailed analysis of the grammar and phonetic development of [[Quenya]], [[Sindarin]] and [[Adûnaic]]. Optionally, a lexicon of commonly used and well accepted [[Neo-Elvish]] vocabulary is included, drawn from [[Helge Fauskanger]]'s ''[https://folk.uib.no/hnohf/nqnt.htm New Testament in Neo-Quenya]'', or the ''[http://www.elvish.org/gwaith/ppq.htm Parma Penyanë Quettaron]'', among others.

No new Tolkien word were added since the v0.8.6 update (May 2023); among other rare missing sources, the Eldamo lexicon does not include the [[Marquette University|Marquette]] [[Westron]] words published in [[Tyalië Tyelelliéva 17|''Tyalië Tyelelliéva'' 17]] by [[Lisa Star]].<ref>Checked on the 11 March 2024. The lexicon may have been updated since.</ref>

Its content is derived from an [[:Wikipedia:XML database|XML data model]], which can be used freely in accordance with the [[:Wikipedia:Creative Commons license|Creative Commons license]] (with attribution).

As can be noticed, [[Tolkien Gateway]] uses Eldamo widely as reference for names that are not glossed in the main sources.

==References==
{{Reflist}}
[[Category:Linguistic websites]]
[[fi:Eldamo]]