{{anglosaxon infobox
| name=Eoh
| image=
| caption=
| people=[[wikipedia:Angles (tribe)|Angle]]
| pronun=
| othernames=''Évar'' ([[Qenya|Q]])<br />''Echos'' ([[Gnomish|G]])<br />''Elvas'' ([[Gothic|Go]])
| titles=
| position=
| location=[[wikipedia:Anglia (peninsula)|Anglia]]<ref name="Eoh"/>
| affiliation=
| language=[[Old English]]
| birth=
| birthlocation=
| rule=
| death=[[wikipedia:5th century|5th century AD]]<ref name="Eoh"/>
| deathlocation=
| age=
| notablefor=
| house=
| parentage=[[Heden]]
| siblings=[[Beorn (son of Heden)|Beorn]]
| spouse=
| children=[[Eriol]]
| gender=Male
| height=
| hair=
| eyes=
| clothing=
| weapons=
| steed=
}}
'''Eoh''' was the father of [[Eriol]], according to the early version of the [[legendarium]] in ''[[The Book of Lost Tales]]''.<ref name="Eoh"/>

== History ==
Eoh lived somewhere in the [[wikipedia:5th century|5th century]] [[wikipedia:Anglia (peninsula)|Anglia]], being a descendant of sea-faring ancestors, some of whom visited [[Valinor]] by the way of [[Olórë Mallë]] in their sleep.<ref>{{LT1|I}}, p. 20</ref> His home had a castle with a great tower, and a river running underneath it.<ref name="Sea">{{LT2|I}}, pp. 4-5</ref>

He had a son called Ottor, who would later become known as ''Eriol'', inheriting his ancestors' sea-longing.<ref name="Sea"/>

However, sometime during Eriol's childhood, Eoh's home was attacked by his brother [[Beorn (son of Heden)|Beorn]], where both Eriol's mother<ref name="Sea"/> and Eoh died, with Eoh being killed by Beorn himself<ref name="Eoh"/> in a "bitter fight about the walls".<ref name="Sea"/><ref group="note">In another note, Eoh's death was either "in the siege" or "in a great battle".</ref><ref>{{LT2|VI}}, outline '''10''', p. 290</ref> His grandsons, [[Hengest]] and [[Horsa]], later avenged his death.<ref name="Eoh"/>

== Etymology ==
The name ''Eoh'' is in [[Old English]], being a poetic word for "horse".<ref name="Eoh">{{LT1|In}}, pp. 23-4</ref>

== Other names ==
Eoh's name in [[Qenya]] was '''''Évar''''', with '''''Echos''''' being its [[Gnomish]] equivalent.

The character was also called '''''Elvas''''' in [[Gothic]], ''Elvas'' probably being a dialectal or archaic form of the Gothic word ''aílvs'' ("horse") - from which the Qenya and Gnomish equivalents of the name were probably derived from.

An alternative Qenya name for Eoh was '''''Eqar'''''.<ref name="Elv">{{PE|15}}, "[[Names and Required Alterations]]", Appendix, ''Text IX'', pp. 16-7</ref>

== Genealogy ==
{{familytree/start}}
{{familytree | | | WOD | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |WOD=[[wikipedia:Odin|Wóden]]<ref name="Eoh"/>}}
{{familytree | | | |:| | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |}}
{{familytree | | | |:| | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |}}
{{familytree | | | HED | | | | | | | | | | | | | | TUL | | | | VAL |HED=[[Heden]]|TUL=[[Tulkastor]]|VAL=[[Valwë]]}}
{{familytree | |,|-|^|-|.| | | | | | | | | | | |,|-|^|-|.| | | |!| |}}
{{familytree | BEO | | EOH | | | | | | | | | | SIB | | VAI |~| LIN |BEO=[[Beorn (son of Heden)|Beorn]]<br /><small>''d. [[wikipedia:5th century|5th century]]''</small>|EOH='''EOH'''<br /><small>''d. [[wikipedia:5th century|5th century]]''</small>|SIB=''unknown<br />sibling''|VAI=[[Vairë (wife of Lindo)|Vairë]]|LIN=[[Lindo]]}}
{{familytree | | | | | |!| | | | | | | | | | | |!| | | | | | | | | |}}
{{familytree | CWE |y| ERI |~|~|~|~|y|~|~|~|~| NAI | | | | | | | | |CWE=[[Cwén]]<br /><small>''fl. [[wikipedia:5th century|5th century]]''</small>|ERI=[[Eriol]]<br /><small>''fl. [[wikipedia:5th century|5th century]]''</small>|NAI=[[Naimi]]*}}
{{familytree | |,|-|^|-|.| | | |,|-|^|-|.| | | | | | | | | | | | | |}}
{{familytree | HEN | | HOR | | HEO | | HED | | | | | | | | | | | | |HEN=[[Hengest]]<br /><small>''fl. [[wikipedia:5th century|5th century]]''</small>|HOR=[[Horsa]]<br /><small>''fl. [[wikipedia:5th century|5th century]]''</small>|HEO=[[Heorrenda]]<br /><small>''fl. [[wikipedia:5th century|5th century]]''</small>|HED=[[Hendwine]]*<br /><small>''fl. [[wikipedia:5th century|5th century]]''</small>}}
{{familytree/end}}

<nowiki>*</nowiki> The name of Hendwine's mother is not Naimi but ''[[Nelmir]]'' in the text on which the basis of his inclusion is founded upon - neither is her relation to [[Lindo]] and [[Vairë (wife of Lindo)|Vairë]] elaborated on.<ref>{{PE|15}}, "[[Names and Required Alterations]]", Appendix, ''Text X'', p. 17</ref>

== Other versions of the legendarium ==
In an early, rejected sketch, a more elaborate version of the attack on Eoh's home is given, in which Beorn attacked his brother's castle and killed him, ''and'' took Eriol captive - from which Eriol eventually escaped.<ref>{{LT2|VI}}, p. 294</ref>

{{references|notes}}
[[Category:Angles]]
[[Category:Characters in The Book of Lost Tales]]
[[Category:Old English names]]
[[Category:Rulers in the Great Lands]]