{{disambig-more|Eärendur|[[Eärendur (disambiguation)]]}}
{{infobox character
| people=[[Arnor]]ian
| name=Eärendur
| image=Mithril Miniatures - Earendur - last king of Arnor.jpg
| caption="Earendur - last king of Arnor" - ''[[Mithril Miniatures|Mithril Miniature]]''
| pronun=
| othernames=
| titles=[[King of Arnor]]
| position=
| location=[[Arnor]]
| affiliation=
| language=[[Sindarin]], [[Westron]]
| birth={{TA|640}}
| birthlocation=
| rule={{TA|777}} - {{TA|861|n}}
| death={{TA|861}}
| deathlocation=
| age=221
| notablefor=
| house=[[House of Isildur]]
| parentage=[[Elendur (King of Arnor)|Elendur]]
| siblings=
| spouse=
| children=[[Amlaith]], [[Kings of Rhudaur|1st King of Rhudaur]], [[Kings of Cardolan|1st King of Cardolan]]
| gender=Male
| height=
| hair=
| eyes=
| clothing=
| weapons=
| steed=
}}
'''Eärendur''' ([[Quenya|Q]], pron. {{IPA|[ˌe.aˈrendur]}}; {{TA|640}}<ref>{{PM|Elendil}}, p. 193</ref> - {{TA|861}},<ref name="North">{{App|North}}</ref> died aged 221) was the tenth and last [[King of Arnor]].

==History==
Eärendur succeeded his father [[Elendur (King of Arnor)|Elendur]] on his death in {{TA|777}}. Eärendur's rule was uneventful, but he was the tenth and last [[King of Arnor]] due to dissension amongst his sons. 

After his death in {{TA|861|n}}, probably due to jealousy on the part of the two younger sons, his three sons split [[Arnor]] into three separate kingdoms: [[Arthedain]], [[Cardolan]] and [[Rhudaur]]. 

His eldest son and rightful heir, [[Amlaith]] of [[Fornost]], became the first [[King of Arthedain]], and it was through Amlaith and his heirs that the line of Isildur endured whilst the line of kings of Rhudaur and Cardolan failed - [[Aragorn|Aragorn II]] was a direct descendant of Amlaith, and it wasn't until [[Aragorn]] became king that Arnor was finally reunified.<ref>{{App|Eriador}}</ref>

After Eärendur the [[Kings of Arthedain]]<ref>{{App|North}}, ''Arthedain''. Amlaith of Fornost, footnote</ref> and the [[Chieftains of the Dúnedain]] no longer took names in [[Quenya]] (High-elven<ref>{{App|Elves}}, first paragraph</ref>), but took names in [[Sindarin]] instead.<ref>{{PM|Elendil}}, manuscript C with corrections and expansions, The Northern Line of Arnor: the Isildurioni, 10. Earendur, p. 192 using Noldorin.</ref><ref>{{PM|Third}}, manuscript T4, The Third Age year 861 using Noldorin</ref>

== Etymology==
''Eärendur'' is a [[Quenya]] name. It means "(professional) mariner".<ref>{{L|297|118}}</ref> As Paul Strack explains, a more literal translation might be "Servant of the Sea". It is a compound of [[eär]] ("sea") and [[-ndur|-(n)dur]] ("servant").<ref>{{webcite|author=Paul Strack|articleurl=https://www.eldamo.org/content/words/word-656453537.html|articlename=Q. ''Eärendur'' m.|website=Eldamo|accessed=29 October 2021}}</ref> It is unlikely that Eärendur himself was devoted to the sea: it is more likely that he was named after one of the two previous [[Eärendur (disambiguation)|Eärendur]]s.

==Genealogy==
{{familytree/start}}
{{familytree | | | | | TAR | | | | |TAR=[[Valandur]]<br/><small>''{{TA|462|n}} - {{TA|652|n}}''†</small>}}
{{familytree | | | | | |!| | | | | |}}
{{familytree | | | | | ELE | | | | |ELE=[[Elendur (King of Arnor)|Elendur]]<br/><small>''{{TA|552|n}} - {{TA|777|n}}''</small>}}
{{familytree | | | | | |!| | | | | |}}
{{familytree | | | | | EAR | | | | |EAR='''EÄRENDUR'''<br/><small>''{{TA|640|n}} - {{TA|861|n}}''</small>}}
{{familytree | |,|-|-|-|+|-|-|-|.| |}}
{{familytree | AML | | CAR | | RHU |AML=[[Amlaith]]<br/><small>''{{TA|726|n}} - {{TA|946|n}}''</small>|CAR=[[Kings of Cardolan|''Kings of<br/>Cardolan'']]|RHU=[[Kings of Rhudaur|''Kings of<br/>Rhudaur'']]}}
{{familytree | |!| | | | | | | | | |}}
{{familytree | BEL | | | | | | | | |BEL=[[Beleg (King of Arthedain)|Beleg]]<br/><small>''{{TA|811|n}} - {{TA|1029|n}}''</small>}}
{{familytree | |:| | | | | | | | | |}}
{{familytree | ART | | | | | | | | |ART=[[Kings of Arthedain|''Kings of<br/>Arthedain'']]}}
{{familytree/end}}

{{references}}
{{seq-start}}
{{seq-head
| race=arnorian
| house=[[House of Isildur]]<small><br/>Cadet branch of [[House of Elros]]</small>
| born={{TA|640}}
| died={{TA|861}}
}}
{{seq
| prow=2
| prev=[[Elendur (King of Arnor)|Elendur]]
| list=8th [[Heir of Isildur|Heir]] of [[Isildur]]
| dates={{TA|777}} - {{TA|861|n}}
| next=[[Amlaith]]
}}
{{seq
| list=10th [[Kings of Arnor|King of Arnor]]
| dates={{TA|777}} - {{TA|861|n}}
| next=''[[Amlaith]], as [[Kings of Arthedain|King of Arthedain]]''
| nvac=None
}}
{{seq-end}}

{{northernline}}

{{title}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:Earendur (Kind of Arnor)}}
[[Category:Characters in The Silmarillion]]
[[Category:House of Isildur]]
[[Category:Rulers of Arnor]]
[[Category:Third Age characters]]
[[de:Earendur (König von Arnor)]]
[[fr:encyclo:personnages:hommes:3a:dunedain:dunedain du nord:earendur]]
[[fi:Eärendur (Arnorin kuningas)]]