{{disambig-more|The Fall|[[The Fall (disambiguation)]]}}
{{events
| image = Pete Amachree - Fingolfin challenges Morgoth.jpg
| event=Fall of Fingolfin
| othernames=
| date={{FA|456}}
| location=[[Gates of Angband]]
| result=[[Fingolfin]]'s death; transfer of [[High King of the Noldor|kingship]] to [[Fingon]]
| partof=The aftermath of the [[Dagor Bragollach]]
| participants=[[Morgoth]], Fingolfin
| description=Duel between Morgoth and Fingolfin in which the former killed the latter
| references=
| gallery=the Fall of Fingolfin
|}}
{{quote|Then [[Morgoth]] hurled aloft [[Grond (Hammer of the Underworld)|Grond]], the Hammer of the Underworld, and swung it down like a bolt of thunder. But [[Fingolfin]] sprang aside, and Grond rent a mighty pit in the earth... Many times Morgoth essayed to smite him, and each time Fingolfin leaped away, as a lightning shoots from under a dark cloud.|''[[Quenta Silmarillion]]'', "[[Of the Ruin of Beleriand and the Fall of Fingolfin]]"}}

The '''Fall of Fingolfin''' was the name given to the noble, yet hopeless, end of [[Fingolfin]], [[High King of the Noldor]], at the hands of [[Morgoth]]. 

After the destruction of the [[Dagor Bragollach]], Fingolfin rode his horse [[Rochallor]] across [[Dor-nu-Fauglith]], and those that saw him pass took him for [[Oromë]], so great was his rage. He rode in fury to the gates of [[Angband]], where he sounded his horn, beat upon the great doors, and challenged Morgoth to single combat.
{{quote|His hopeless challenge dauntless cried<br/>Fingolfin there: 'Come, open wide,<br/>dark king, your ghastly brazen doors!<br/>Come forth, whom earth and heaven abhors!<br/>Come forth, O monstrous craven lord,<br/>and fight with thine own hand and sword,<br/>thou wielder of hosts of banded thralls,<br/>thou tyrant leaguered with strong walls,<br/>thou foe of Gods and elvish race!<br/>I wait thee here. Come! Show thy face!'|''[[Lays of Beleriand]]'', "[[The Lay of Leithian]]", Canto 12}}

Morgoth could not refuse such a challenge before his captains, and left his stronghold for the last time during those wars. He came forth in black armour, with his great shield and his [[Iron Crown]]. He swung the great hammer [[Grond (Hammer of the Underworld)|Grond]], seeking to smite Fingolfin, but the King leaped aside. The hammer made great pits in the ground where it fell.<ref name=Fingolfin>{{S|Fingolfin}}</ref>

Fingolfin wounded Morgoth seven times as they fought, but he began to weary. Three times Fingolfin fell to his knees, but each time he rose and continued to fight. At last, however, he stumbled in one of the pits left by Grond. But even as Morgoth set his great foot upon him to crush him, Fingolfin stabbed the foot of Morgoth with [[Ringil|his sword]]. So perished Fingolfin, and Morgoth sought to cast his broken body to his [[wolves]]. But [[Thorondor]] swooped down on Morgoth, scarring his face and carrying the body of the King to a mountain-top. There [[Turgon]] built a [[Fingolfin's Cairn|cairn]] over him, and no [[Orc]] would go near it. Morgoth walked with a limp ever afterwards, and would always bear the wounds from that battle.<ref name=Fingolfin />

{{references}}
[[Category:Conflicts of the First Age]]