{{Unnamed}}
{{disambig-more|Battle of Osgiliath|[[Battle of Osgiliath (disambiguation)]]}}
{{battle
|name=Faramir's defence of Osgiliath
| image = Donato Giancola - Faramir at Osgiliath.jpg
|conflict=[[War of the Ring]]
|date=[[12 March]] {{TA|3019}}
|place=The ruins of western [[Osgiliath]]
|result=Victory for [[Sauron]], gaining the crossing of the Anduin River
|side1=[[Gondor]]
|side2=[[Mordor]]
|commanders1=
* [[Faramir]]
|commanders2=
* [[Sauron]]
* [[Witch-king of Angmar]]
|forces1=Unknown, the men of Gondor
|forces2=Unknown, forces of Mordor, Southrons, Haradwaith
|casual1=Unknown 
|casual2=Unknown
}}
{{wotr}}

'''Faramir's defence of Osgiliath''' was a futile attempt to stem the offensive of Sauron's army advancing from [[Minas Morgul]] towards [[Minas Tirith]] through the ruins of the city on the [[Anduin]].

==Prelude==
[[10 March|Two days]] after the departure of [[Frodo Baggins]] from [[Henneth Annûn]], [[Faramir]] barely returned to [[Minas Tirith]] from [[Cair Andros]], since he was almost caught by [[fell beasts]] of the five [[Nazgûl]] until [[Gandalf]] saved him.<ref name="Osgiliath">{{RK|V4}}</ref><ref name="App">{{App|Great}}</ref>

Early in the morning of [[11 March|the next day]] [[Denethor]] ordered his son back to Osgiliath, hoping to make the Enemy pay dearly for the crossing of the river. Despite his warnings that [[Sauron]] could easily afford to lose ten times [[Gondor]]'s losses, and that those so far afield would find retreat perilous, Denethor insisted that Faramir defend the ruined city because no army could cross the river north of Cair Andros or southwards towards [[Lebennin]].  After the meeting of the Council Faramir took what strength he could to Osgiliath.<ref name="Osgiliath" />

==The Battle==
On 12 March, {{TA|3019}},<ref name="App" /> Sauron's army met and pushed Faramir's forces west out of Osgiliath.  Although the Enemy did pay dearly for the crossing, it was less than hoped. In secret, numerous floats and barges had been built in East Osgiliath which allowed Sauron's forces to swarm like beetles upon the defenders.<ref name="Osgiliath" />

==Aftermath==
Under the Enemy's pressure, Faramir was forced to retreat with his men back to the [[Causeway Forts]] where the ongoing battle resumed. On [[13 March]],<ref name="App" /> this fight was also lost, while Faramir himself was gravely wounded by a poisonous arrow of the [[Haradrim]] and struck down by the [[Black Breath]]. Only a sortie by [[Imrahil]] and his knights saved him and the rest of the remaining soldiers from that onset.<ref name="Osgiliath" /> Sauron's army advanced and the [[Siege of Gondor]] would begin.

==Portrayal in adaptations==
'''2003: ''[[The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King]]'':'''

:Orcs, led by [[Gothmog (Lieutenant of Morgul)|Gothmog]], swarm across the Anduin and engage Faramir's garrison throughout the ruins of western Osgiliath. When his forces begin to be overwhelmed and the city is clearly lost, he leads a retreat back to Minas Tirith, harried by the Ringwraiths along the way. Denethor then delusionally orders Faramir to lead a counter-attack to retake Osgiliath, despite Faramir's complaint that the city is completely overrun. The [[Pelennor Fields]] are not protected by the [[Rammas Echor]] and there are no [[Causeway Forts]] on the road between Osgiliath and Minas Tirith.
{{references}}
[[Category:Conflicts of the War of the Ring]]