{{chapter
| image=Anke Eißmann - The phial of Galadriel.jpg
| title=Farewell to Lórien
| book=The Fellowship of the Ring
| number=20
| event=After receiving gifts from [[Galadriel]], the [[Fellowship of the Ring|Company]] leaves [[Lothlórien|Lórien]] and sets out down the [[Anduin]].
| date=[[16 February]] {{TA|3019|n}}
| location=[[Lothlórien|Lórien]]
| previous=The Mirror of Galadriel
| next=The Great River
}}

{{quote|May it be a light to you in dark places, when all other lights go out.|[[Galadriel]]}}

'''Farewell to Lórien''' is the eighth chapter of the second book in ''[[The Fellowship of the Ring]]''.

==Summary==
[[Galadriel]] gave the [[Fellowship of the Ring|Company]] boats in order to float down the [[Anduin]]. She gave each of them a [[Gifts of Galadriel|gift]], in order to help them on their way. She gave [[Aragorn]] a [[Andúril's sheath|sheath]] made to fit his sword [[Andúril]] and a silver broach that held a clear green stone, the [[Elfstone]] of the house of [[Elendil]]. To [[Boromir]], she gave a [[Boromir's belt|belt]] of gold. To [[Legolas]] she gave a [[Bow of the Galadhrim|bow]] strung with elf-hair and a quiver of arrows. To [[Meriadoc Brandybuck|Merry]] and [[Peregrin Took|Peregrin]], she gave silver [[Merry and Pippin's belts|belts]] with golden clasps. To Sam she gave neither something to keep him on the road nor to defend himself; instead she gave him a [[Sam's garden box|box]] of earth from her gardens, so that if he returned to his home in [[the Shire]], his garden would bloom like none other. When she asked [[Gimli]] what he wanted of her. After much modest refusal, he asked for a strand of [[Hair of Galadriel|her hair]]. She gave him three, as well as a blessing that his hands would ever flow with gold, though it would have no dominion over his mind. To [[Frodo Baggins|Frodo]] she bequeathed a small [[Phial of Galadriel|crystal vial]] in which was caught the [[light]] of the [[Star of Eärendil]], amid the waters of a fountain. It would be a light for him in dark places and make the night brighter.

The Company then left on their way down the river, and Galadriel followed them for a while, singing them a [[Galadriel's Song|song]]. They had chosen a difficult, but a valiant path.
==Composition==
Initially Tolkien considered that [[Time]] was "frozen" for the Fellowship while staying in Lórien, and it was still [[January]] when they departed it. Much later Tolkien decided that Time still passed, and set the departure on [[14 February]], and some days later Frodo observes the full [[moon]] of [[8 March]] in ''[[The Forbidden Pool]]''. However much later Tolkien introduced the [[Shire Reckoning]], in which both [[January]] and [[February]] have 30 days (instead of 31 and 28). He changed the date of the chapter to [[15 February|15]], and then [[16 February]], in order to still have Frodo observe the full moon on 8 March.<ref>{{HM|RC}}, pp. xlvi, xlvii</ref>
{{Giftsofgaladriel}}
{{references}}
[[Category:The Fellowship of the Ring chapters]]
[[fi:Jäähyväiset Lórienille (TSH)]]