{{disambig-two|the [[Index:Poems by J.R.R. Tolkien|poem]]|titular [[Turtle-fish]]|[[Fastitocalon]]}}
{{Poem infobox
| title=Fastitocalon
| image=Pauline Baynes - Fastitocalon Chapterhead.jpeg
| caption="Fastitocalon" by [[Pauline Baynes]]
| other names=
| written=Before [[June]] of [[1927]]
| revised=[[1961]] or [[1962]]<ref name=CG>{{CG|2II}}, entry "Fastitocalon"</ref>
| published=''[[Stapeldon Magazine]]'',<br>''[[The Adventures of Tom Bombadil]]'',<br>''[[The Collected Poems of J.R.R. Tolkien]]''
| subject=[[Fastitocalon]], [[Turtle-fish]]
}}
'''''Fastitocalon''''' is a poem written by [[J.R.R. Tolkien]] published in ''[[The Adventures of Tom Bombadil]]'' that was attributed to [[Samwise Gamgee]], who based it on "an older piece of the comic bestiary lore" which [[Hobbits]] like.<ref name=preface>{{ATB|Preface}}, p. 7</ref> The central character is [[Fastitocalon]], the last of the [[Turtle-fish]], and the setting is [[Middle-earth]].<ref name=poem>{{AB|Fastitocalon}}</ref>

==Poem excerpt==
<poem style="font-style:italic; margin-left:20px;">
Look, there is Fastitocalon!
An island good to land upon,
      Although 'tis rather bare.
Come, leave the sea! And let us run,
Or dance, or lie down in the sun!
      See, gulls are sitting there!
                       Beware!<ref name=poem/></poem>

==Etymology==
''Fastitocalon'' derives from the word ''astitocalon'' of the [[Hobbitish|Shire-speech]] (rendered in modern English), which itself is an alteration or corruption of the [[Elvish|High-Elven]] ''Aspido-chelōne'' (rendered in Greek, meaning "turtle with a round shield (of hide)"), and "the F was put on by the versifier simply to make the name alliterate".<ref name=letter>{{L|255}}; see also "[[Letter to Eileen Elgar (5 March 1964)]]" (letter)</ref>

==Inspiration==
[[J.R.R. Tolkien]] was inspired by an [[Old English]] bestiary, appearing in the [[Wikipedia:Exeter Book|Exeter Book]]. The idea of giant marine turtles ultimately derives from Eastern myths, and in the European versions the monster is often confused with whales.<ref name=letter/>

==Background==
An early version of the poem was published together with ''[[Oliphaunt (poem)|Iumbo, or Ye Kinde of ye Oliphaunt]]'' as '''''[[Adventures in Unnatural History and Medieval Metres, being the Freaks of Fisiologus]]''''' in ''[[The Stapeldon Magazine#June 1927|''The Stapeldon Magazine]]'', Oxford, vol. 7, no. 40 in June 1927 on pages 123-7.<ref>{{webcite|author=|articleurl=http://www.tolkienbooks.net/php/details.php?reference=13290|articlename=Stapeldon Magazine. 1927|dated=|website=TB|accessed=6 April 2014}}</ref><ref name=commentary>{{AB|Comm}}, pp. 224-7</ref>

{{references}}

{{poems}}

{{title}}

[[Category:Poems in The Adventures of Tom Bombadil]]

[[fi:Fastitocalon]]