{{collectible
| image=Film Frame Collectible.jpg
| name=Film Frame Collectible
| company=[[Sideshow Collectibles]]
| released=[[16 December|December 16]]th, [[2003]]
| type=Ornament
| editionsize=
| material=
| size=
| weight=
| price=Free to [[Trilogy Tuesday]] attendees
| link=Sold Out
|}}
The '''Film Frame Collectible''' was a collectible produced by [[Sideshow Collectibles]] for [[New Line Cinema]] who distributed the item to attendees of [[Trilogy Tuesday]] in 2003.

==Description==
===Official description===
{{quote|At the request of New Line Cinema, Sideshow Collectibles and Weta Workshop designed this ultimate gift item celebrating The Lord of the Rings(TM) film trilogy. Weta Workshop, the effects studio responsible for helping Peter Jackson to bring Middle-earth to life, has crafted this exclusive desk piece that includes actual film frames from The Fellowship of the Ring(TM), The Two Towers(TM), as well as The Return of the King(TM). Each strip of film is unique and individually cut from a single reel selected from each of the three films. These frames are in CinemaScope wide-ratio format, which gives the actual frame the appearance of being distorted. However, when it's projected onto screens in theaters using an anamorphic lens, the frame appears proportional. The film frames also have thin stripes on the left hand side of each frame. These stripes are the optical sound tracks.<br /><br /> The film frames are embedded in a hand crafted desktop frame that is representative of the most iconic cultures in each of the films. The Fellowship of the Ring sculpted motifs include the graphics on the door to the Mines of Moria, as well as Dwarven architectural elements. The Two Towers sculpted motifs include the Golden Sun seen above the doors of the Great Hall of Rohan, as well as other Rohirrim elements. The Return of the King sculpted motifs include the White Tree of Gondor, as well as motifs of Minas Tirith including the crown and seven stars of Gondor. The frame is accented by the Eye of Sauron located at the apex of the cultures with the graphic motifs of his overbearing presence invading down into the entire piece.|[[Sideshow Collectibles]]}}

==External links==
* [http://www.sideshowtoy.com/cgi-bin/category.cgi?category=filmframe Official product page]

[[Category:Collectibles]]