{{scene
| name = Flight to the Ford
| film = [[The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring]]
| image = The Lord of the Rings (film series) - Ford of Bruinen.jpg
| number = 21 (extended edition)<br>
           17 (theatrical cut)
| duration = 6:24
| event = [[Arwen]] takes [[Frodo Baggins|Frodo]] to [[Rivendell]].
| characters = [[Arwen]], [[Frodo Baggins|Frodo]], [[Nazg没l|Ringwraiths]], [[Aragorn|Strider]], [[Samwise Gamgee|Sam]], [[Meriadoc Brandybuck|Merry]], [[Peregrin Took|Pippin]]
| previous = [[The Caverns of Isengard (scene)|The Caverns of Isengard]]
| next = [[Rivendell (scene)|Rivendell]]
}}
'''Flight to the Ford''' is the seventeenth scene of ''[[The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring]]'' and the twenty-first of [[The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring (extended edition)|''The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring'' (extended edition)]]. This scene was extended in the latter edition.

==Synopsis==
As [[Frodo Baggins|Frodo]]'s health fails due to his [[Morgul]] wound, [[Aragorn|Strider]] instructs the hobbits to search for the plant named [[Athelas|Kingsfoil]] so that he might stop the flow of the poison. Strider searches himself for a little bit before he is accosted by a blade held to his neck. Upon looking up, the wielder of the blade is revealed to be [[Arwen]], daughter of [[Elrond]], who has been searching for the party. Arwen transfers Frodo to her horse and flies at the sound of the [[Nazg没l|Ringwraiths]].

The Ringwraiths give chase across a field, falling in behind Arwen. Arwen makes it to the [[Ford of Bruinen]]. The Nazg没l are checked by the flowing river as her horse gallops across. Arwen challenges the Riders to claim Frodo, only to be stunned when the chief rider begins to cross, followed by the others. Arwen quickly recites an incantation which causes the river to stir. A flood shaped like horses made of water soon rampages down the stream and strikes the Riders, washing them away. Frodo seemingly succumbs to his wound and drifts into unconsciousness.

==Differences==
*Arwen does not appear in this scene in the book. Her inclusion was introduced by the movie.
*[[Glorfindel]] does not appear in the movie as his role is replaced by Arwen.
*Frodo makes it to the ford by himself in the book and is conscious enough to defy the will the of the Nine Riders, unlike the weakened state he is in on-screen.
*Elrond and [[Gandalf]] create the flood that carries the Nazg没l away, not Arwen.

{{title}}

[[Category:The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring scenes|21]]