{{infobox character
| people=[[Dwarves|Dwarf]]
| name=Frerin
| image=The Lord of the Rings Online - Frerin.jpg
| caption=Frerin in ''[[The Lord of the Rings Online]]''
| pronun=
| othernames=
| titles=
| position=
| location=[[Lonely Mountain]]
| affiliation=
| language=[[Khuzdul]]
| birth={{TA|2751}}
| birthlocation=[[Lonely Mountain]]
| rule=
| death={{TA|2799}} (aged 48)
| deathlocation=[[Azanulbizar]]
| age=
| notablefor=
| house=[[House of Durin]]
| parentage=[[Thráin|Thráin II]]
| siblings=[[Thorin]], [[Dís]]
| spouse=
| children=
| gender=Male
| height=
| hair=
| eyes=
| clothing=
| weapons=
| steed=
}}
'''Frerin''' ([[Third Age]] {{TA|2751|n}} – {{TA|2799|n}}, aged 48 years) was a [[Dwarves|dwarf]] of the royal line of [[Durin's folk]], and the second son of King [[Thráin|Thráin II]]. His older brother was the Dwarven hero and future king [[Thorin|Thorin II Oakenshield]], and his younger sister was [[Dís]]. 

==History==
With the rest of his family, Frerin was driven into exile from the [[Lonely Mountain]] when the [[Dragons|Dragon]] [[Smaug]] [[Sack of Erebor|attacked]] their home. He later took part in the bloody [[War of the Dwarves and Orcs]], although he was still very young at the time. 

In the final conflict of the war, the [[Battle of Azanulbizar]], Frerin was in the first assault of the vanguard that was led by his father, which was thrown back with loss. Frerin and the rest of the vanguard were driven into a wood of great trees near the lake [[Mirrormere]]. It was there Frerin was slain, along with his kinsman [[Fundin]], and many others.

After the battle, the Dwarves that were left built pyres, and [[Burned Dwarves|burned]] the bodies of their dead, Frerin being among them.<ref>{{App|Durin}}</ref>

==Etymology==
[[Jim Allan]] has suggested that ''Frerin'' may derive from either the [[Old Norse]] Dwarf-name ''Frár'' ("Swift") in the ''[[Völuspá]]'', or from Old Norse ''frérinn'' ("frozen").<ref>{{HM|IE}}, "Giving of Names", p. 225</ref>

== Genealogy ==
{{familytree/start}}
{{familytree| | | | | THR | | | | | | |THR=[[Thrór]]<br/><small>''{{TA|2542|n}} - {{TA|2790|n}}''†</small>}}
{{familytree| | | | | |!| | | | | | | |}}
{{familytree| | | | | THR | | | | | | |THR=[[Thráin|Thráin II]]<br/><small>''{{TA|2644|n}} - {{TA|2850|n}}''†</small>}}
{{familytree| |,|-|-|-|+|-|-|-|.| | | |}}
{{familytree| THO | | FRE | | DIS | | |THO=[[Thorin|Thorin II]]<br/><small>''{{TA|2746|n}} - {{TA|2941|n}}''†</small>|FRE='''FRERIN'''<br/><small>''{{TA|2751|n}} - {{TA|2799|n}}''†</small>|DIS=[[Dís]]<br/><small>''b. {{TA|2760|n}}''</small>}}
{{familytree| | | | | | | |,|-|^|-|.| |}}
{{familytree| | | | | | | FIL | | KIL |FIL=[[Fíli]]<br/><small>''{{TA|2859|n}} - {{TA|2941|n}}''†</small>|KIL=[[Kíli]]<br/><small>''{{TA|2864|n}} - {{TA|2941|n}}''†</small>}}
{{familytree/end}}

==Portrayal in adaptations==
'''2021: ''[[The Lord of the Rings Online]]'':'''
:Frerin appears in an extended flashback depicting the [[Battle of Azanulbizar]] that shows his eventual demise. In the [[Thorin's Halls]] in [[Ered Luin]] the largest courtyard is named "Frerin's Court" in his honour.

{{references}}
[[Category:Dwarves]]
[[Category:Longbeards]]
[[Category:Norse names]]
[[Category:Third Age characters]]
[[de:Frerin]]
[[fi:Frerin]]
[[fr:/encyclo/personnages/nains/3a/frerin]]