{{Incomplete}}
{{plant infobox
| name=Funguses
| image=
| caption=
| pronun=
| othernames=
| location=Across [[Middle-earth]]
| notablefor=[[Mushrooms]]
| family=
| appearance=
}}

'''Funguses''' were a type of organism that included [[mushrooms]].<ref name="Cut">{{HM|FR}}, "[[A Short Cut to Mushrooms]]"</ref> There were some funguses that grew in [[Mirkwood]] alongside [[herbs]].<ref name="spiders">{{H|8}}</ref> These funguses and herbs had "pale leaves and unpleasant smells".<ref name="spiders"/> During the [[siege of Gondor]], the Orcs marching toward [[Minas Tirith]] were compared to "a foul fungus-growth".<ref name="siege">{{RK|V4}}</ref>

==Other versions of the legendarium==
In a note discussing the [[Drúedain]], Tolkien made mention about the fungi in the [[First Age]]: they were generally considered ugly and dangerous by the [[Elves]] and most of the [[Edain]], and the less wise called them "ork-plants", believing them cursed and  blighted by [[Morgoth]]. The Eldar did not eat them and only a few Edain knew how to distinguish the edible ones and could eat them because of great hunger when lost in the wild. The Drúedain had a lore of plants and ate fungi with pleasure (to the astonishment of the other peoples), and they cultured their favorite ones. They passed this knowledge to the [[Haladin]] who ate them when guests out of courtesy, and resolved to them at need. Tolkien later discarded the note believing that this trait made the Drúedain "too like Hobbits".<ref>{{PM|XNotes}}, n. 52</ref>

==Portrayal in adaptations==
'''1984-1997: ''[[Middle-earth Role Playing]]''''' 
:The various books released for the game describe many different kinds of funguses:

:'''Buttonhead''' ([[Sindarin|S.]] ''Morchwan'', [[Quenya|Q.]] ''Morihwan''), also called ''Tumbletop'', was a small black-headed fungus with a stark white stalk, found in underground caves far from daylight. It grew in clusters of up to a hundred, resembling toadstools but with hard black caps. The white stalk, when eaten, dispelled weariness and granted renewed vigour for twelve hours, though a heavy sleep of equal length followed. The heads themselves were indigestible and caused painful sickness if swallowed whole.<ref>{{ICE|2026}}, p. 92</ref>

:'''Crowtongue''' ([[Sindarin|S.]] ''Lamdur'', [[Quenya|Q.]] ''Morilamba''), also called ''Blackfoot'', ''Dardelléz'', or ''Darksight'', was a black, tongue-shaped fungus about the size of a finger. It grew underground on damp stone, clinging tightly to its surface by hair-like roots. When ground into a paste, crowtongue produced a cold salve that rendered the wearer invisible to night vision, though it caused shivering when it touches the skin.<ref>{{ICE|2026}}, p. 96</ref>

:'''Febfendu''' ([[Sindarin|S.]] ''Nenlebed'', [[Quenya|Q.]] ''Nelleps''), also called ''Durossa'', was a white finger-like fungus found along the reeds of cool freshwater. When boiled and poured into the ear, it restored hearing within a week.  Ingestion of the brew caused ringing in the ears. The fungus was also edible raw, tasting pleasant in salads, though it became bitter when cooked.<ref>{{ICE|2026}}, pp. 103-104</ref>

:'''Flameroot''' ([[Sindarin|S.]] ''Lachthond'', [[Quenya|Q.]] ''Narsunda'') was a short, spiky red fungus growing on rotting wood or dead plants, most often in caves or dark forests. Reaching six inches in height, its bright tufts could be steeped as an infusion to make wounds heal faster. Its flesh was bitter and acidic, leading to a mistaken belief that the fungus was poisonous.<ref>{{ICE|2026}}, p. 105</ref>

:'''Gulperwash''' ([[Sindarin|S.]] ''Grodwaeth'', [[Quenya|Q.]] ''Rottovahtë''), also known as ''Trollsnot'', was slimy mould found found in underground bodies of water. It could be spread on the forehead to ease fevers and swallowed to treat organ damage.<ref>{{ICE|2026}}, p. 108</ref>

:'''Hiam Moss''' ([[Sindarin|S.]] ''Neldorhwann'', [[Quenya|Q.]] ''Fernehwan''), also called ''Corantha'', was a parasitic fungus that clung to the beech trees of Rhudaur. It appeared as brown-red, woolly patches of various sizes, and trees that were encircled were doomed to die. Hillmen brewed hiam into a tea that granted heightened strength and endurance, though at the cost of deep exhaustion afterwards. Except for most Hillmen, many Men are allergic to it.<ref>{{ICE|2010}}, p. 176</ref><ref>{{ICE|2026}}, p. 110</ref>

:'''Lenhafn''' ([[Sindarin|S.]] “Way-throne”, [[Quenya|Q.]] ''Coimahalma''), also called ''Great-meal'' or ''Lemsang'', was an edible fungus found in dark forests and the depths of Moria. It grew up to two feet high, with a purple-furred crown three feet across. Cultivated by Dwarves, it was notable for its rich nourishment, akin in repute to [[lembas]].<ref>{{ICE|2010}}, p. 178</ref><ref>{{ICE|2026}}, p. 117</ref>

:'''Margath''' ([[Sindarin|S.]] ''Urchar'', [[Quenya|Q.]] ''Harúrë'') was an orange, gelatinous fungus resembling a kidney, found underground. It was used by Orcs in salves to dull pain, replacing it with a steady burning sensation. It also left the user with foul odours and nightmares.<ref>{{ICE|2026}}, p. 120</ref>

:'''Moonthumb''' ([[Sindarin|S.]] ''Gulgalad'', [[Quenya|Q.]] ''Calambë''), also called ''Light-tongue'' or ''Glow Worm'', was a small curved fungus about the size of a thumb. Growing in caverns near running water, it emitted a faint glow too dim to see by. When eaten fresh, it restored vitality, though drying removed its light.<ref>{{ICE|2026}}, p. 123</ref>

:'''Mustakuu''' ([[Sindarin|S.]] ''Mornithil'', [[Quenya|Q.]] ''Mornisil''), also called ''Blackmoon'', was a globular black fungus found in the sub-arctic wetlands of the Far North. When boiled, it yielded an oily residue that attracted the insect swarms of the tundra, drawing them in frenzied clouds to whatever bore its scent. The Lossoth carried the oil in bone tubes, using it to lure insects away from their camps.<ref>{{ICE|2026}}, p. 124</ref>

:'''Plant-Like Stone''' ([[Sindarin|S.]] ''Galassondren'', [[Quenya|Q.]] ''Ondohwan'') was a low fungus of Moria’s depths, growing close to the ground and resembling scattered pebbles. When pressed, it exuded a milky sap known only to Dwarves, which sealed wounds, halted bleeding, and warded off infection. The secret was fiercely guarded, and to jest of “blood from a stone” in Dwarvish company was a quick way to cause anger.<ref>{{ICE|2026}}, p. 129</ref>

:'''Rabbit Thumb''' ([[Sindarin|S.]] ''Helveb'', [[Quenya|Q.]] ''Helmëa''), also called ''Furry-man'', was a tiny, fuzzy brown fungus growing on old animal droppings in deciduous forests. Though unremarkable alone, when brewed with true tarnas it was said to cure the disease ''igturfas''.<ref>{{ICE|2026}}, p. 130</ref>

:'''Slimy Gorkin''' ([[Sindarin|S.]] ''Mithbaran'', [[Quenya|Q.]] ''Sindivarnë''), also called ''Slime Grub'', was a slimy brown fungus with mucus-like gills. Found in great patches underground, it was edible though unpleasant in both taste and texture, and was a the key ingredient in antidotes to several poisons.<ref>{{ICE|2026}}, p. 136</ref>

:'''Stout-Heart''' ([[Sindarin|S.]] ''Belegor'', [[Quenya|Q.]] ''Turcórë'') was a small purple fungus found in dry caverns. For Dwarves, it strengthened their constitution when eaten extensively.<ref name="p138">{{ICE|2026}}, p. 138</ref>

:'''Strawthumb''' ([[Sindarin|S.]] ''Olgorthad'', [[Quenya|Q.]] ''Áyolos''), also called ''Dreambreaker'' or ''Strengthgiver'', was a tiny yellow stalk-fungus found on rotting wood in deciduous forests. When eaten, it briefly increased strength, but repeated use led to nightmares and long-lasting aversion to the fungus.<ref name="p138"/>

:'''Toad’s Glove''' ([[Sindarin|S.]] ''Gurbeg'', [[Quenya|Q.]] ''Loicopica''), also called ''Slota-ána'' or ''Deathwart'', was a small fungus that sprouted rapidly on corpses in rainforests. Appearing within hours of death, it grew and perished in swift succession, thriving until only bone remained. Ground into powder, it was one of the antidotes to the poison slota, and healers kept it alive by storing it with rotting meat.<ref>{{ICE|2026}}, pp. 140-141</ref>

:'''Viper’s Bane''' ([[Sindarin|S.]] ''Maehern'', [[Quenya|Q.]] ''Maxar''), also called ''Heal-all'' or ''Softstone'', was a pebble-sized brown fungus found in deep caverns. Almost indistinguishable from the rocks around it, it was believed to neutralize any toxin when eaten raw.<ref>{{ICE|2026}}, p. 143</ref>

:'''Zur''' ([[Sindarin|S.]] ''Durníd'', [[Quenya|Q.]] ''Mornenda''), also called ''Strapack'', was a pale, slimy fungus growing in cold, lightless caves. Though small, it could be brewed into a foul-smelling tea that heightened the senses of hearing and smell to uncanny levels. Drinkers could overhear conversations from afar or detect poison by scent, but the initial rush often made them vomit, and few dared to repeat the experience.<ref>{{ICE|2026}}, p. 148</ref>

'''2005: ''[[The Lord of the Rings Roleplaying Game]]: [[Paths of the Wise: The Guide to Magicians and Loremasters|Paths of the Wise]]'''''
:Two types of funguses are distinguished:

:'''Hwanestad''' ([[Sindarin|S.]] “healing fungus”) was a pale green mould that grew only upon the [[Ents]] of [[Fangorn Forest|Fangorn]]. Rarely gifted by them, it was a powerful antidote to poisons, both curing recent damage and granting resistance for a day.<ref>{{Decipher|Wise}}, p. 86</ref>

:'''Norrog''' was a puffy, brown cavern fungus with a gritty taste. Even unprepared, a handful could sustain a Man for a day. Properly prepared, it increased vigour and granted resilience. Orcs often used its taste to mask poisons.<ref>{{Decipher|Wise}}, pp. 86-87</ref>

'''2007: ''[[The Lord of the Rings Online]]'':'''
:In the game, many creatures, most commonly [[Orcs|Orc-kind]], [[Spiders]], and [[Trolls]], possess a fungal infection from the [https://lotro-wiki.com/wiki/Foundations_of_Stone Foundations of Stone]. These creatures are referred to as [[Globsnaga]].<ref>https://lotro-wiki.com/wiki/Globsnaga</ref>

== External links ==
* {{webcite|author=[[Mark Fisher]]|articleurl=https://www.glyphweb.com/arda/f/funguses.html|articlename=Funguses|dated=28 June 2023|website=EoA|accessed=27 August 2025}}

{{references}}

[[Category:Plants]]