{{infobox character
| people=[[Orcs|Orc]]
| name=Golfimbul
| image=Eytan Eylul Guler - Golfimbul the Wargrider.jpg
| caption="Golfimbul the Wargrider" by [[:Category:Images by Eytan Eylul Guler| Eytan Eylul Guler]]
| pronun=
| othernames=
| titles=King of the [[Orcs#Orcs and Goblins|Goblins]] of [[Mount Gram]]
| position=
| location=[[Mount Gram]]<br />[[Greenfields]]
| affiliation=[[Orcs of the Misty Mountains|Orcs of Mount Gram]]
| language=''Presumably'' [[Orkish]]
| birth=
| birthlocation=
| rule=
| death={{TA|2747}}
| deathlocation=[[Greenfields]] ([[Northfarthing]])
| age=
| notablefor=Being in the first "[[Battle of Greenfields|game]]" of [[Golf]]
| parentage=
| siblings=
| spouse=
| children=
| race=
| gender=Male
| height=
| hair=
| eyes=
| clothing=
| weapons=
| steed=
}}
'''Golfimbul''' was a king of the [[Orcs#Orcs and Goblins|Orcs]] of [[Mount Gram]].<ref name="HParty">{{H|Party}}</ref>

==History==
Golfimbul led a band of Orcs in an invasion of [[the Shire]] in {{TA|2747}}.<ref>{{App|TA}}</ref> [[Bandobras Took]] met Golfimbul in the [[Northfarthing]] of [[the Shire]] and defeated him in the [[Battle of Greenfields]]. During the battle Bandobras, who was large enough to ride a horse, charged at Golfimbul and knocked off his head with a club. Golfimbul's head flew through the air for 100 yards and went down a rabbit hole. It is said that this is how the game of [[golf]] was invented.<ref name="HParty"/>

==Etymology==
Jim Allan suggests that ''Golfimbul'' has a Scandinavian origin, means "Wind-terrible" and contains the elements ''Gol-'' ("wind") and ''Fimbul'' ("might" or "great").<ref>{{HM|IE}}, Giving of Names, p. 226</ref>

"Fimbul" is Old Norse for "great".<ref>[[Wikipedia:Fimbulwinter#Etymology]]</ref>

[[Robert Foster]] notes that the connection with the English word "golf" suggests that the name is either fictitious or translated [[Westron]].<ref>{{HM|Guide}}, p. 167</ref>

==Other versions of the legendarium==
At an early stage in writing ''[[The Hobbit]]'' [[J.R.R. Tolkien]] used the name '''[[Fingolfin]]''' for the Goblin-leader, which also contained the word "golf" for the joke about the origin of the game (although not as prominently as in "Golfimbul").<ref>{{HH|Bladorthin}}, p. 39</ref> Many years later, in the never-finished 1960 rewrite of the story, [[J.R.R. Tolkien|Tolkien]] intended to change the name to '''Gulfimbul'''.<ref>{{HH|NC1}}, p. 776</ref> [[John D. Rateliff]] speculated that this was either a further evolution of Tolkien's languages or because he was dropping the golf-joke reference.<ref>{{HH|NC1}}, note 24, p. 785</ref> The 1960 revision was an effort to "upgrade" ''The Hobbit'' to the same epic level as ''[[The Lord of the Rings]]''.

==Portrayal in adaptations==
===Films===
'''2012: ''[[The Hobbit: An Unexpected Journey]]'':'''
:In trying to convince [[Bilbo Baggins|Bilbo]] of his [[Tooks|Tookishness]], [[Gandalf]] tells about the story of the [[Battle of Greenfields]], referring to Golfimbul as a Goblin-king.

===Games===
'''2007: ''[[The Lord of the Rings Online]]'':'''
:In [[Brockenborings]] there is a wooden statue depicting Bandobras standing in a golf pose over Golfimbul's head. Every Spring, [[the Shire]] celebrates Bullroarer Took Day when the Hobbits place tankards of the drink under his statue in his honor.

:The epic book prologue in the Shire involves the player trying to thwart '''Lubach''', who believes that he is the descendant of Golfimbul, from invading the Shire with a group of Goblins. He dwells in a landmark in the Greenfields referred to as '''Golfimbul's Hole'''.

{{references}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:Golfimbul}}

{{seq-start}}
{{seq-head
| name=Golfimbul
| race=orc
| house=
| born=
| died={{TA|2747}}
}}
{{seq
| prev=unknown
| list=King of the [[Goblins]] of [[Mount Gram]]
| dates=unknown - {{TA|2747}}
| next=unknown (possibly none)
}}
{{seq-end}}

[[Category:Characters in The Hobbit]]
[[Category:Orcs]]
[[Category:Rulers in Middle-earth]]
[[Category:Third Age characters]]
[[de:Golfimbul]]
[[fi:Golfimbul]]