{{organization infobox
| name=Gwaith-i-Mírdain
| image = Angus McBride - Celebrimbor.gif
| caption="Celebrimbor" by Angus McBride
| pronun={{respell|gweyeth|ee|mear|deyen}}
| othernames=Mírdain, People of the Jewel-smiths
| founded={{SA|750}}
| founder=[[Celebrimbor]]
| purpose=
| members=Mainly [[Noldor]]
| location=Headquartered at the [[House of the Mírdain]] in [[Ost-in-Edhil]], [[Eregion]]
| disbanded={{SA|1697}}
| notablefor=Forging the [[Rings of Power]]
| gallery=the Gwaith-i-Mírdain
}}
The '''Gwaith-i-Mírdain''', the '''People of the Jewel-smiths''', was a brotherhood of [[Elves|Elven]] master craftsmen of the [[Second Age]] who created the [[Rings of Power]].

==History==
The Gwaith were founded by [[Celebrimbor]] and other [[Noldor]] of [[Lindon]] who settled in [[Eregion]], close to the [[Dwarves]] of [[Moria|Khazad-dûm]] and their ''[[mithril]]'' mines. Their capital was [[Ost-in-Edhil]] ({{SA|750}}<ref>{{App|B1}}</ref>).

Noldor and [[Dwarves of Khazad-dûm|Dwarves]] cooperated for about a thousand years, and their rare friendship was the closest between [[Elves]] and [[Dwarves]] in history. Celebrimbor helped to construct the famous and magical [[Doors of Durin|West-gate of Moria]]. The Gwaith were said to be the most talented artisans to have worked since the time of [[Fëanor]] himself (who was Celebrimbor's grandfather). 

[[Sauron]], after failing with [[Gil-galad]] and [[Elrond]], targeted the Gwaith. In the guise of [[Annatar]] the "Lord of Gifts" in {{SA|1200}} he presented himself as an agent of the [[Valar]] and taught them how to forge the [[Rings of Power]]. The Gwaith were easily tempted since they wanted to bring to [[Middle-earth]] the joys of Valinor.<ref>{{S|V}}</ref><ref name="L">{{L|131}}</ref> The Rings would prevent or slow the decay of the mortal world, preserve what was desired or loved and also enhance the natural powers of a possessor even if that would mean disrupting the natural course of the mortal world.<ref name="L"/><ref>{{L|181}}</ref><ref>{{L|154}}</ref>

The Gwaith together with "Annatar" made several rings in {{SA|1500}}. Because of their friendship with the Dwarves, Celebrimbor presented King [[Durin III]] with [[Ring of Thrór|a Ring of Power]].<ref>{{App|A3}}</ref> When Annatar had left (actually for [[Mordor]]) about {{SA|1590}} Celebrimbor made the [[Three Rings]]<ref>{{FR|I2}}</ref> partly using the teachings of "Annatar".

Then Sauron betrayed them and forged [[the One Ring]]. However, the Gwaith realized his plan and denied to hand him their Rings, resulting in the [[War of the Elves and Sauron]]. Eregion was devastated in {{SA|1697}} and the survivors of the Gwaith followed [[Elrond]] and retreated to [[Rivendell]].

==Etymology==
''Gwaith-i-Mírdain'' means "Brotherhood of Jewel-smiths" in [[Sindarin]] (from ''[[gwaith]]'' = "host, people" and ''[[mírdain]]'' = "jewel-smiths").

{{references}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:Gwaith-i-Mirdain}}

[[Category:Organizations]]
[[Category:Sindarin demonyms]]
[[Category:Smiths]]
[[de:Gwaith-i-Mírdain]]
[[fr:encyclo:personnages:elfes:noldor:gwaith-i-mirdain]]
[[fi:Gwaith-i-Mírdain]]