{{author infobox
| image=
| name=Helmut W. Pesch
| born=[[30 August]], [[1952]]
| died=
| education=
| occupation=Author, translator
| location=
| website=[http://www.helmutwpesch.de/ www.helmutwpesch.de]
|}}

'''Helmut W. Pesch''' (born [[August 30]], [[1952]]) is a German author, translator, editor, illustrator, philologist and literary scholar.

==Biography==
Helmut W. Pesch was born and raised in [[wikipedia:Mönchengladbach|Mönchengladbach]]. He studied English philology, history of art and archaeology in Cologne and later in Glasgow. In [[1981]], he completed his doctorate to become Doctor of Philosophy. His doctoral thesis, ''Fantasy - Theorie und Geschichte einer literarischen Gattung'' ("Fantasy - theory and history of a literary genre"), was the first German work about fantasy literature and was published in [[1982]]. 

Between [[1984]] and [[1986]] he was subeditor for Science-Fiction and Fantasy at the German publishing company Bastei-Lübbe, since then he works there as editor for fiction. He is also a member of the Board of Academic Advisors for [[Walking Tree Publishers]].<ref>{{webcite|author=|articleurl=http://www.walking-tree.org/board_of_advisors.php|articlename=Walking Tree Publishers Board of Advisors|dated=|website=[http://www.walking-tree.org/ Walking Tree Publihers]|accessed=21 January 2012}}</ref>

Pesch wrote some novels, inspired by mythological themes. During his research for fantasy and [[J.R.R. Tolkien]], Helmut W. Pesch published several essays and a critical anthology about Tolkien's stories and its inspirations. With his knowledge of [[Elvish]] languages, he wrote a two-part elvish-dictionary.

Currently Pesch lives with his wife and his daughter near Cologne.

==Bibliography==

===Translations===

*[[1991]]: [[The Lord of the Rings Appendices|Appendices]], [[Appendix E|Appendix E (I)]] (''Anhang E (I): Aussprache'', first published in the German edition of 1991)
*[[2002]]: [[The Complete Guide to Middle-earth]] (''Das große Mittelerde-Lexikon'' (revised edition))
*[[2007]]: [[The Children of Húrin]] (''Die Kinder Húrins'') (co-translator [[Hans J. Schütz]])
*[[2008]]: [[The Road to Middle-earth]] (''Der Weg nach Mittelerde'')

===Original Works===

*[[1984]]: ''[[J. R. R. Tolkien: Der Mythenschöpfer]]'' (Anthology)
*[[1994]]: ''[[Das Licht von Mittelerde]]'' (Collection of lectures and essays)
*[[2001]]/[[2004]]: ''[[Elbisch-Wörterbuch]]'' and ''[[Elbisch - Lern- und Übungsaufgaben]]'' (Two-part elvish-dictionary with exercises)
*[[2009]]: ''[[Das große Elbisch-Buch]]'' (Elvish-dictionary)
{{References}}
[[Category:Authors|Pesch, Helmut W.]]
[[Category:Translators|Pesch, Helmut W.]]
[[Category:German people|Pesch, Helmut W.]]
[[Category:People by name|Pesch, Helmut W.]]
[[de:Helmut W. Pesch]]