{{Unnamed}}
{{events
| event=High feast
| image = Marya Filatova - Harvest Festival.jpg
| othernames=
| date=
| location=[[Valinor]]
| result=
| partof=Worship of [[Ilúvatar|Eru]]
| participants=[[Valar]], [[Maiar]], parts of the [[Elves]]
| description=
| references=
|}}

The '''high feast''' was a feast that [[Manwë]] made in praise of [[Ilúvatar|Eru]] to celebrate each gathering of fruits. For this feast, the [[Valar]] and [[Maiar]] were bidden to come to the [[Ilmarin|halls of Manwë and Varda]]. Just before the [[Darkening of Valinor]], a feast was held to which also the [[Vanyar]] and [[Noldor]] came, and they sang together with the Maiar before Manwë and [[Varda]].<ref name="Darkening">{{S|8}}</ref>

Alternate names used for this event include the '''great festival''',<ref name=sm30>{{SM|2a}}, p. 30</ref> '''autumn feast''',<ref name=sm30 /> and '''high festival'''.<ref name=sm57>{{SM|3}}, p. 57</ref>

== High feast of 1495==
During great high feast of {{YT|1495}}, Manwë sought to heal the rifts between the houses of the Noldor.

To [[Fëanor]], dwelling at [[Formenos]] following his banishment, Manwë had sent the following message of invite: "''Fëanor son of Finwë, come and do not deny my bidding! In my love thou remainest and wilt be honoured in my hall.''"<ref>{{MR|P3II7}}, §58a</ref> Fëanor did come to the feast, but only because he had read Manwë's message as a command;<ref name="MR58c">{{MR|P3II7}}, §58c</ref> he wore no raiment of festival or ornaments, and denied sight of his [[Silmaril]]s by keeping them locked back in Formenos.<ref name="Darkening" /> Finwë would not come and remained in Formenos, stating that "''While the ban lasts upon Fëanor my son, that he may not go to Túna, I hold myself unkinged, and will not meet my people, nor those that rule in my stead.''"<ref>{{MR|P2j}}, §112</ref> With Finwë remained the [[sons of Fëanor]]<ref name="MR58c" /> along with the other Noldor residing at Formenos.<ref name="Darkening" /> 

Fëanor was reconciled, in word, with [[Fingolfin]] before the throne of Manwë after Fingolfin held forth his hand and stated: "''As I promised, I do now. I release thee, and remember no grievance.''" Fëanor took his hand and remained silent, with Fingolfin then adding: "''Half-brother in blood, full brother in heart will I be. Thou shalt lead and I will follow. May no new grief divide us.''" to which Fëanor replied "''I hear thee, so be it.''"<ref name="Darkening" />

It was told that in this very hour [[Melkor]] and [[Ungoliant]] destroyed the [[Two Trees]].<ref name="Darkening" />

== Other versions of the legendarium ==
In the earliest version of the [[legendarium]] in ''[[The Book of Lost Tales]]'', the corresponding event is the '''Samírien''', which means "Feast of Double Mirth" in [[Qenya]]. [[Christopher Tolkien]] noted that the name was "Presumably derive from the root MIRI ‘smile’, ''sa-'' is referred to in [[Qenya Lexicon|QL]] as an ‘intensive prefix’."<ref>{{LT1|Appendix}}, p. 345</ref>

{{References}}
[[Category:Festivals and feasts]]