{{website
| image=
| name=Hiswelókë
| URL=https://www.tolkiendil.com/essais/hisweloke
| slogan=''le Dragon de Brume''<br/>("The Dragon of Mist")
| commercial=No
| revenue=
| type=Scholarly articles, essays and dictionary; [[wikipedia:Online magazine|e-zine]]
| language=French (main website);<br/>English, French and German (dictionary)
| license=
| articlecount=
| registration=
| owner=[[Didier Willis]]
| creator=
| keypeople=
| launch=1997
| status=Inactive
}}
'''Hiswelókë''' ([[Quenya]] for "Dragon of Mist"), was a French-language website founded in 1997 by [[Didier Willis]] seeking to popularise scholarship of the works of [[J.R.R. Tolkien]] through French-language articles and essays. 

== History ==

In the early 1990s, ''Hisweloce'' (sic) initially debuted as an internal newsletter to the "chair of geography" of the French organization "la Fée",<ref name="fee">[https://www.tolkienguide.com/modules/wiwimod/index.php?page=Activities1993France Tolkien Activities in France] and [https://www.marquette.edu/library/archives/Mss/JRRT/JRRT-hunnewell.php S. Gary Hunnewell collection at Marquette] (reel 8 folder 23).</ref> sent by regular mail to interested members. There were six short irregular issues printed between 1992 and 1994.

In 1997, the author's personal site, hosted on Geocities, included, besides personal fiction, a "Tolkien's corner" section, which later evolved into ''Hiswelókë''. In the earlier days of the website, most articles and essays were originally collected into four editions of an e-zine.<ref name="Downloads">[http://www.jrrvf.com/hisweloke/site3 Hiswelókë], "[http://www.jrrvf.com/hisweloke/site3/download.php?lng=fr Téléchargements]" (accessed [[January]] [[7 January|7]], [[2011]])</ref> In [[2002]], the website joined JRRVF and, hosted as a "wing" of this website, continued activities until around 2008, with articles available online independently. Aside from personal fiction, the website included articles on botany, linguistics, geography, mythology, [[wikipedia:onomastics|onomastics]] (the study of names) and reviews of other pieces of scholarly work.

In 2010, "Le Dragon de Brume" was transformed into a non-profit organization, mostly focused on publishing collections of essays.<ref name="dragondebrume">[https://sites.google.com/site/dragonbrumeux/ Le Dragon de Brume], non-profit organization under the terms of French 1901 act (accessed [[April]], [[2021]])</ref> The old website being definitely abandoned, some of its remaining contents were gradually transferred to Tolkiendil.<ref name="tolkiendil">[https://www.tolkiendil.com/essais/hisweloke Hiswelókë] on Tolkiendil (accessed [[April]], [[2021]])</ref> The pages on JRRVF are scheduled to be closed in 2021, excepted the Sindarin dictionary project (which will remain on JRRVF).

== Sindarin dictionary ==

Specifically, from [[23 October|October 23]], [[1999]]<ref name="News">[http://www.jrrvf.com/hisweloke/sindar/index.html Hiswelókë's Sindarin dictionary], "[http://www.jrrvf.com/hisweloke/sindar/news.html News]" (accessed [[January]] [[7 January|7]], [[2011]])</ref> the project has included '''Hiswelókë's Sindarin dictionary''' which aims to create a complete [[Sindarin]] dictionary - including annotations and relevant amendments - aimed at satisfying the requirements of both serious scholars and casual fans.<ref name="About">[http://www.jrrvf.com/hisweloke/sindar/index.html Hiswelókë's Sindarin dictionary], "[http://www.jrrvf.com/hisweloke/sindar/about.html About]" (accessed [[January]] [[7 January|7]], [[2011]])</ref> 

Aside from online wordlists, the project also included a downloadable [[wikipedia:XML|XML]] lexicon,<ref name="github">''[https://github.com/Omikhleia/sindict A Sindarin and Noldorin dictionnary]'' in XML ([https://tei-c.org/ TEI] format)</ref> and the (now obsolete) [[Dragon Flame]] and Hesperides freeware applications.

==External links==
* [https://www.tolkiendil.com/essais/hisweloke Homepage] (French)
* [http://www.jrrvf.com/hisweloke/sindar/index.html Hiswelókë's Sindarin dictionary] (English)
{{references}}
[[Category:Linguistic websites]]