{{expansion}}
{{kingdom
| image=Peter Xavier Price - Hithlum.jpeg
| name=Hithlum
| pronun=[[Sindarin|S]], {{IPA|[ˈhiθlum]}}
| othernames=[[Quenya|Q]]. ''Hísilómë''
| location=North-western [[Beleriand]], within the [[Ered Wethrin]]
| capital=[[Barad Eithel]]
| towns=
| regions=[[Dor-lómin]], [[Mithrim]]
| population=Primarily [[Elves]] ([[Sindar]] and [[Noldor]]), but [[Dor-lómin]] was latterly occupied by [[Men]]
| language=[[Quenya]], [[Sindarin]]
| govern1=[[Fingolfin]]
| govern2=Later [[Fingon]]
| govern3=
| currency=
| holiday=
| precededby=
| event1=Noldor arrive
| event1date={{YT|1497}}
| event2=Fingolfin becomes [[High King of the Noldor|High King]]
| event2date={{FA|5}}
| event3=Defeat of the [[Noldor]]
| event3date={{FA|472}}
| event4=
| event4date=
| event5=
| event5date=
| followedby=
}}
{{Quote|It was a fair land while the [[Siege of Angband]] lasted, although its air was cool and winter there was cold.|''[[Quenta Silmarillion]]'', "[[Of Beleriand and Its Realms]]"}}

'''Hithlum''' was a region north of [[Beleriand]] near the [[Helcaraxë]].

==Description==
Hithlum was separated from Beleriand proper by the [[Ered Wethrin]] mountain chain, and was named after the sea mists which formed there at times.<ref name="Bel">{{S|Beleriand}}</ref>  The Ered Wethrin ("Mountains of Shadow") formed the southern and eastern wall, and had only a few passes; as such they formed a natural defensive line. The western wall was formed by the [[Ered Lómin]] or "Echoing Mountains", which curved north-westward to [[Helcaraxë]].  The land of [[Lammoth]] lay west of the Ered Wethrin and was not part of Beleriand or Hithlum, and the land of [[Nevrast]] was separated from Hithlum by the southern part of the Ered Lómin.<ref name="Map">{{S|Map}}</ref>  Hithlum was cold and rainy, but quite fertile.<ref name="Bel"/>

Hithlum was subdivided in [[Mithrim]], where the High Kings of the [[Noldor]] had their halls,<ref name="Bel"/> and [[Dor-lómin]], which later became a fief of the [[House of Hador]].<ref>{{S|West}}</ref>

==History==
The northern highlands, such as the mountains about Hithlum, were raised during the battles of the [[Ainur]] during the [[Battle of the Powers]].<ref>{{S|3}}</ref>

Hithlum was populated by the [[Elves of Mithrim]], who were the [[Sindar]], since the [[First Age]]. The Noldor entered Hithlum via the [[Firth of Drengist]] and first camped at the shores of [[Lake Mithrim]]. The land was covered by mists and vapours from the [[Thangorodrim]], and thus they named it '''Hísilómë''' or '''Land of Mist'''.<ref name="Bel"/> [[Thingol]] gave leave to the Noldor to settle it and was ruled by [[Fingolfin]] and [[Fingon]] from its northern lands.<ref name=return>{{S|Return}}</ref> 

Later in the [[First Age]], Hithlum was [[assaults on Hithlum|continually under attack]] by [[Morgoth]], but its natural defences, fortified by fortresses such as [[Barad Eithel]], proved impassable.<ref name="Map"/> Almost a century after the [[Dagor Aglareb]], a small number of [[Orcs]] came from the [[Firth of Drengist]] from the west, but once they were spotted, Fingon pushed them back into the sea.<ref name=return/>

In {{FA|416}} Fingolfin granted [[Hador]] a hereditary fiefdom in [[Dor-lómin]],<ref>{{S|Men}}</ref> where he gathered most of the people of his kin, thus forming the noble '''[[House of Hador]]'''.<ref>{{GA|136}}</ref> The mountains protected Hithlum during the [[Dagor Bragollach]], after which [[Edain]] of the [[House of Beor|First House]] came from [[Dorthonion]] as refugees and joined those of Hador.<ref name=ruin/> 

Seven years after the Dagor Bragollach, Morgoth sent a great force against Hithlum, attacking the passes of the Ered Wethrin. [[Galdor (Lord of Dor-lómin)|Galdor]] died defending the [[Eithel Sirion]]; in a second attempt the [[Falathrim]] sailed up the Firth of Drengist, then assisted Fingon by striking the unsuspecting orcs from the west.<ref name=ruin>{{S|Fingolfin}}</ref>

Hithlum eventually was lost after the [[Nirnaeth Arnoediad]]. The Hadorians were scattered, killed, or enslaved, the Noldor who could not flee in time were enslaved in Morgoth's mines. Morgoth feigned to gave the [[Swarthy Men]] the lands of Hithlum as a reward, but in truth they were actually trapped there.<ref>{{S|Fifth}}</ref>

Hithlum was completely destroyed during the [[War of Wrath]].<ref>{{S|Earendil}}</ref>

==Etymology==
{{Pronounce|Hithlum.mp3|Ardamir}}
''Hithlum'' is a [[North Sindarin]] word,<ref name=PE17/> meaning "Mist-shadow" (''[[hith]]'' + ''[[lum]]''), a translation from [[Quenya]] '''''Hísilómë''''' (pron. {{IPA|[ˌhisiˈloːme]}}, stem ''Hisilómi-'').<ref>{{S|Index}}, ''Hísilómë''</ref> Its classical [[Sindarin]] name is said to be '''''Hithlũ'''''.<ref name=PE17>{{PE|17}}, p. 133</ref>  

[[J.R.R. Tolkien|Tolkien]] initially marked the word as [[Noldorin]]; its second element was cognate to Quenya ''[[lumbe]]''.<ref>{{LR|Etymologies}}, p. 370, entry "LUM-"</ref>

==Other versions of the legendarium==
In an [[A Song of Aryador|early poem]] and in the [[Turambar and the Foalókë|Lost Tale of Turambar]], the region was called ''Aryador'' in the language of [[Men]], although according to the ''[[Gnomish Lexicon]]'', it was an [[Ilkorin]] word. [[Qenya]] cognates are given: ''Areandor'', ''Areanóre'', ''Areanor''.<ref>{{LT2|Appendix}}, p. 249</ref>
{{navigation
| title= Hithlum
| north-west= [[Helcaraxë]]
| north=
| north-east= [[Angband]]
| west= [[Lammoth]]
| east= [[Anfauglith]], [[Dorthonion]]
| south-west= [[Nevrast]]
| south= [[Nargothrond]]
| south-east= [[Doriath]]
}}
{{references}}
[[Category:Beleriand]]
[[Category:Sindarin locations]]
[[Category:Elven realms]]

[[de:Hithlum]]
[[fi:Hithlum]]
[[fr:encyclo/geographie/regions/beleriand/hithlum]]