{{infobox character
| people=[[Hobbits|Hobbit]]
| name=Holman Greenhand
| image=The Hobbit (2003) Holman.png
| caption=Holman Greenhand from [[The Hobbit (2003 video game)|''The Hobbit'' (2003 video game)]]
| pronun=
| othernames=
| titles=
| position=Gardener
| location=[[Hobbiton]]
| affiliation=
| language=
| birth={{SR|1292}}
| birthlocation=
| rule=
| death=
| deathlocation=
| age=
| notablefor=
| family=[[Greenhand Family|Greenhand]]
| parentage=[[Halfred Greenhand]]
| siblings=
| spouse=
| children=
| gender=Male
| height=
| hair=
| eyes=
| clothing=
| weapons=
| steed=
}}
'''Holman Greenhand''' was a Hobbit of [[the Shire]], noted for being a fine gardener.

==History==
Holman's grandfather and namesake, [[Holman the greenhanded]], initiated both the family name and the family profession: gardening.<ref name="Gamgee">{{App|Gamgee}}</ref> Holman became a gardener in [[Hobbiton]], and one of the gardens he tended was that of [[Bag End]]. Around {{TA|2941}}, he took on his second cousin once-removed, [[Hamfast Gamgee]], as an apprentice.<ref name="Party">{{FR|Party}}</ref> 

One morning of that spring, [[Gandalf]] visited Bag End, but found its master, [[Bilbo Baggins]], not at home. Holman informed him that Bilbo had gone on one of his walks, as it was the [[Elves]]' [[Yestare|new year]]. Holman's description of Bilbo convinced Gandalf he had found the perfect man for his [[Quest for Erebor|mission]], to re-take [[Lonely Mountain|Erebor]].<ref name="Quest">{{UT|Erebor}}</ref>

When Bilbo went missing - that is, on his mission - Holman and Hamfast had their hands full in making sure the garden wasn't trampled as the place was swarming with Hobbits, hoping to get a piece of the Baggins estate.<ref name="Party"/>

The Gaffer took over the job around {{TA|2961}},<ref>{{FR|Party}}: "[Gaffer Gamgee] had tended the garden at Bag End for forty years"</ref> about which time Holman retired or died.

Holman was mentioned by the Gaffer to [[Ted Sandyman]], in a conversation which took place at a small inn on the Bywater road called [[The Ivy Bush]], in the year [[T.A. 3001]]; it was during this conversation that the Gaffer mentioned his relation to Holman ("him being my dad's cousin").<ref name="Party" />

==Etymology==
Holman means "hole-man", and is distinct from the real-life English surname<ref name="Nomen">{{HM|N}}, p. 760</ref> which contains ''holm'' "river island" rather than ''hol'' "hole".<ref>[[Jim Allan]] (ed.), ''[[An Introduction to Elvish]]'', "Giving of Names"</ref>

==Portrayal in Adaptation==
'''2003: [[The Hobbit (2003 video game)|''The Hobbit'' (2003 video game)]]:'''
:Holman lives in a hut on the other side of [[the Water]]. 

{{references}}

[[Category:Hobbits]][[Category:Greenhand]]
[[Category:Third Age characters]]
[[de:Holman Grünhand]]
[[fr:encyclo/personnages/hobbits/la mainverte/holman la mainverte 2]]
[[fi:Kololainen Viherpeukalo]]