{{scene
| image=
| name=Homage to Gandalf
| film=[[The Lord of the Rings (1978 film)|''The Lord of the Rings'' (1978 film)]]
| number=21
| duration=3:27
| event= Arrival at [[Lothlórien]]
| previous= Balrog Strikes
| next= Galadriel's Test
|}}

'''''Homage to Gandalf''''' is the Twenty-first scene of [[The Lord of the Rings (1978 film)|the 1978 film ''The Lord of the Rings]]''. 

==Synopsis==
After [[Gandalf]] has fallen down with [[Durin's Bane|the Balrog]], [[Aragorn]] commands the [[Fellowship of the Ring|Company]] out of [[Moria]]. As he tends the wounds of [[Samwise Gamgee|Sam]] and [[Frodo Baggins|Frodo]], he discovers the latter's ''[[mithril]]'' vest. Frodo mentions hearing [[Gollum|flapping feet]], and the Fellowship are quick to conclude that it cannot be an [[orcs|orc]]. Aragorn assures him that whatever it is, it will not follow them where they are going: Lothlórien. Upon hearing that name, [[Boromir]] protests, speaking of the stories of the place that go around in [[Gondor]]. 

[[Galadriel]] and [[Celeborn]] welcome the Fellowship, and inform them that they already know of Gandalf's fall and Frodo's quest. Elves sing a sad song to ''Mithrandir'', and Aragorn and Frodo briefly discuss their memories of him. Frodo is a bit surprised upon hearing so much of Mithrandir and his many names: in the Shire, he was just Gandalf. Aragorn tells him that that was probably the name the Wizard was fondest of. 

The Fellowship rests in Lothlórien, practising their fighting, sleeping, and picking flowers. [[Legolas]] and [[Gimli]] start to bond.

==Cast==
{| class="wikitable"
|- bgcolor="#CCCCCC"
! Role !! Actor
|-
| [[Boromir]] || [[Michael Graham Cox]]
|-
| [[Aragorn]] || [[John Hurt]]
|-
| [[Samwise Gamgee]] || [[Michael Scholes]] (voice), [[Billy Barty]]
|-
|[[Frodo Baggins]] || [[Christopher Guard]] (voice), [[Sharon Baird]]
|-
| [[Galadriel]] || [[Annette Crosbie]]
|-
| [[Celeborn]] || Uncredited
|-
| [[Legolas]] || [[Anthony Daniels]]
|-
| [[Gimli]] || No lines
|-
| [[Peregrin Took|Pippin]] || No lines
|-
| [[Meriadoc Brandybuck|Merry]] || No lines
|}

==Differences from the source material==
* Galadriel and Celeborn are already aware of Gandalf's fall, because "the forests told [them]". 

==Errors==
* As in the previous scene, Merry and Pippin's hair is miscoloured blond.
* Celeborn is pronounced Seleborn.

[[Category:The Lord of the Rings (1978 film) scenes]]