{{Incomplete}}
{{race infobox
| name=Horses
| image=Pamela Shanteau - Wild Horses.jpg
| caption=''Wild Horses'' by Pamela Shanteau
| pronun=
| othernames=''Roch''
| origin=
| location=[[Aman]], [[Middle-earth]]
| affiliation=[[Valar]], [[Rohan]]
| rivalry=
| language=
| people=
| members=[[Arod]], [[Arroch]], [[Asfaloth]], [[Felaróf]], [[Firefoot]], [[Hasufel]], [[Lightfoot]], [[Nahar]], [[Rochallor]], [[Roheryn]], [[Shadowfax]], [[Snowmane]], [[Windfola]]
| lifespan=
| distinctions=
| height=
| hair=
| skin=
| clothing=
| weapons=
| gallery=horses
}}

'''Horses''' were beasts of burden and transport used by [[Elves]] and [[Men]] through the ages. Famous among horses were [[Nahar]], the steed of [[Oromë]], [[Rochallor]], the warhorse of [[Fingolfin]], and [[Felaróf]], the steed of [[Eorl the Young]]. The breeding and riding of horses were arts developed to their greatest height, among Men, by the [[Rohirrim]] in the [[Third Age]].

==History==
Horses existed as native creatures in [[Middle-earth]]; however, there is evidence that some of the breeds in Middle-earth, particularly in [[Beleriand]] and [[Rohan]], were enhanced by sires brought from [[Aman]]. Although horses may have roamed freely when [[Men]] awoke with the rising of the Sun, it is unclear if the Elves who stayed in Middle-earth - the [[Sindar]], [[Nandor]], and [[Avari]] - had horses while "Middle-earth lay for the most part in the Sleep of Yavanna."<ref name=Sindar/>

In the early days of the [[First Age]], Oromë was heard sounding his horn [[Valaróma]], and riding through Beleriand and over the mountains hunting the fell beasts of Morgoth. He had been riding and hunting there with his folk since before the Firstborn awoke and, of all the Valar, came the most reluctantly to Valinor.<ref>{{S|Vala}}</ref> But, the Sindar were awed by his splendour and feared him and the "great noise and onrush of Nahar."<ref name=Sindar>{{S|Sindar}}</ref> This does not mean that the early Elves feared horses, as they would have no reason to fear any natural and uncorrupted beast,<ref name=Riders>{{TT|Riders}}</ref> or that they did not keep horses themselves.

In [[Valinor]], the Elves did ride. [[Fëanor]]'s son, [[Celegorm]], "in Valinor was a friend of Oromë, and often followed the Vala's horn."<ref name=Eldamar>{{S|Eldamar}}</ref> [[Aredhel]], while still in Eldamar, was also mentioned as one who loved to ride and hunt in the forests.<ref name=Eldamar/> The [[Noldor]] brought some of their horses, which flourished in [[Ard-galen]], from Valinor with them on the ships that sailed to [[Losgar]]:

{{blockquote|From few their horses had increased swiftly, and the grass of Ard-galen was rich and green. Of these horses many of the sires came from Valinor, and they were given to Fingolfin by Maedhros in atonement of his losses, for they had been carried by ship to Losgar.|{{S|Beleriand}}}}

The Rohirrim believed their noble horse line, the ''[[Mearas]]'', must have had a sire that was brought by the hunter [[Béma]] (Oromë) from the West.<ref name=Eorl>{{App|Eorl}}</ref> 

The horses of Elves were ridden bitless, with only decorative headstalls and saddles, or wholly without tack,<ref name=Riders/><ref name=Flight>{{FR|Flight}}</ref><ref name="L211"/> and the ''Mearas'', like elf horses, also seemed to prefer being ridden thus by the riders they allowed.<ref name=Eorl/><ref>{{TT|Palantir}}</ref>

==Other names==

In [[Sindarin]], the word for "horse" is '''''roch'''''.<ref name=SApp>{{S|Appendix}}</ref>

*Examples: ''[[Rochallor#Etymology|Rochallor]]'', ''[[Rohan#Etymology|Rohan]]'', ''[[Rohirrim#Etymology|Rohirrim]]'', ''[[Roheryn#Etymology|Roheryn]]''<ref name=SApp/>

In [[Quenya]], the word for "horse" is '''''rokko'''''<ref name=SApp/> or '''''rocco'''''<ref name=L211>{{L|211}}</ref> (pl. ''rokkor''<ref>{{PE|21}}, p. 78</ref>). In the [[The Etymologies|''Etymologies'']], these forms derive from the [[Sundocarme|root]] [[ROK]].<ref>{{LR|Etymologies}}, p. 384</ref> An intermediate form was [[Primitive Quendian|Primitive Elvish]] ''rokkō'' ("swift horse for riding").<ref name=L211/><ref name=L297>{{L|297}}</ref>

Words in [[J.R.R. Tolkien|Tolkien]]'s early tongues included: 
*[[Qenya]] ''olombo'' ("horse") <ref name=VT45a>{{VT|45a}}, p. 28</ref>
*[[Noldorin]] ''lobor'' ("horse")<ref name=VT45a/>
*[[Gnomish]] ''Brog'' ("horse"); ''bros'' (''brossa'') or ''broch'' ("mare"); ''lobros'' ("steed, horse"); ''mair'' ("horse", poetic).<ref>{{PE|11}}, pp. 24, 54, 56</ref>

[[Adûnaic]] also had its own terms for a horse, specifically  ''karab'' in "common" gender singular ("horse", as a species/creature), the masculine singular ''karbû'' ("male horse", "stallion"), the feminine singular ''karbî'' ("female horse", "mare"), and the plural ''karîb'' ("horses").<ref>{{SD|3}}, p. 434, 435</ref><ref>[https://folk.uib.no/hnohf/adunaic.htm Adûnaic - The Vernacular of Númenór], "Adûnaic Wordlist", Ardalambion (folk.uib.no) by Helge Fauskanger</ref><ref>[https://eldamo.org/content//words/word-3999922351.html Adûnaic - "karab"], "Adunaic Words", Eldamo.org by Paul Strack</ref>

==Portrayal in adaptations== 
'''2002: ''[[The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers]]'' and ''[[The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King]]'':'''
:[[Brego (horse)|Brego]] is a horse ridden by [[Aragorn]].

'''2007: ''[[The Lord of the Rings Online]]'':'''
:Horses are the main transportation for the Free Peoples of Middle-earth. At level 35 players can earn the right to own their own mount. They can be bought at the Bree Horse Farm and also at various other locations with enough reputation.

'''2022: ''[[The Lord of the Rings: The Rings of Power]]'':'''
:[[Berek]] was the steed of [[Isildur]] and the [[House of the Lords of Andúnië|House of the]] [[Lord of Andúnië|Lords of]] [[Andúnië]].

'''2024: ''[[The Lord of the Rings: The War of the Rohirrim]]'':'''
:[[Ashere]] was the steed of Héra

==See also==
*[[Ponies]]

*[[:Category:Images of horses|Images of horses]]

{{references}}

[[Category:Horses]]
[[de:Kategorie:Pferde]]
[[fr:encyclo/categories/personnages/animaux/chevaux]]
[[fi:Hevoset]]