{{sources}}
{{Noble House infobox
| name=House of Elendil
| image=
| caption=
| othernames=
| founder= [[Elendil]], son of [[Amandil (Lord of Andúnië)|Amandil]]
| leader=[[King of Arnor]], [[King of Arthedain]], [[King of Gondor]], [[Chieftain of the Dunedain]], later the [[High King (Dúnedain)|High King]]
| location=[[Eriador]], [[Arnor]], [[Gondor]]
| affiliation=[[Last Alliance of Elves and Men]], [[Host of the West (Arnor)|Host of the West]]
| rivalry=
| destroyed=
| language=[[Sindarin]], [[Westron]], [[Quenya]]
| members=[[Isildur]], [[Anárion]], [[Aragorn II]], [[Arathorn II]], [[Hyarmendacil I]], [[Eärnur]], [[Fíriel]]
| race=Initially [[Númenóreans|Númenórean]], [[Dúnedain]] after [[Meneldil]] 
| distinctions=
| height=Tall
| hair=Dark
| skin=Pale
| clothing=
| weapons=[[Narsil]] (later [[Andúril]])
| heirlooms=[[Crown of Gondor]], [[Elendilmir]], [[Elfstone]], [[Ring of Barahir]], [[Sceptre of Annúminas]],  
}}
The '''House of Elendil''' was the royal line of the [[Dunedain]] established in [[Middle-earth]] which ruled over the [[Realms in Exile]] of [[Arnor]] and [[Gondor]].
==History==
[[Elendil]], son of [[Amandil]], escaped the [[Downfall of Númenor]] with his two sons, [[Isildur]] and [[Anárion]]. They sought refuge in [[Middle-earth]], where they founded two kingdoms: [[Arnor]] in the north, and [[Gondor]] in the south. Elendil ruled both of these as [[High King of the Dúnedain]], and from his descendants came the line of Kings in both the North-kingdom and the South-kingdom.

Elendil himself was slain in the [[Siege of Barad-dûr]], and his elder son Isildur inherited the [[High King of the Dúnedain|High Kingship]]. Two years later, Isildur himself, together with his three elder heirs, was lost in the [[Disaster of the Gladden Fields]]. His only remaining heir, [[Valandil (King of Arnor)|Valandil]], was only a boy, effectively leaving Arnor without a King. Thus the House of Elendil split into two lines. In the south, Isildur's nephew [[Meneldil]] had been left to rule Gondor in his uncle's name. Meneldil now took up the full Kingship of Gondor, and Gondor was ruled by his descendants for more than two thousand years.

When Valandil came of age, he inherited Arnor, the northern realm of his father. Valandil and his descendants ruled the [[Arnor|North-kingdom]] for many generations, until dissent arose among the sons of the tenth King, [[Eärendur (King of Arnor)|Eärendur]]. This conflict ultimately saw Arnor divided into three kingdoms: [[Arthedain]], [[Cardolan]] and [[Rhudaur]]. Eärendur's eldest son and true heir, [[Amlaith]], took control of Arthedain, while his brothers took up rule in the other new lands. Arthedain endured for more than a thousand years, but eventually all three kingdoms of the [[Northern Dúnedain]] fell to the armies of [[Angmar]].

The line of Elendil was not broken in that defeat. The heir of [[Arvedui]], the last King of [[Arthedain]], and of [[Firiel]], daughter of [[Ondoher]], King of Gondor, was [[Aranarth]]. He took the title [[Chieftain of the Dúnedain]], and his descendants led a proud but scattered people through the last millennium of the [[Third Age]]. It was not the same in Gondor, when [[Eärnur]], last king of Gondor, and last of the House of Anárion's heirs from the male line after the death of King Ondoher and his sons during the [[Disaster of the Morannon|disaster of the Black Gate]], answered the Witch-King's challenge and headed towards [[Minas Morgul]], and was not to be seen again, presumably dead.<ref>{{App|Gondor}}, entry for King Eärnur, p. 1052</ref> The last Chieftain was Aranarth's heir through many generations: [[Aragorn|Aragorn II]], who united the [[Two Kingdoms]] after the [[War of the Ring]] and became the first King of the [[Reunited Kingdom]]. Thus the House of Elendil returned to Gondor.

==See also==
*[[House of Isildur]] and [[Kings of Arnor]]
*[[House of Anárion]] and [[Kings of Gondor]]

{{references}}

[[Category:House of Elendil| ]]
[[Category:Mannish noble houses|Elendil]]