{{sources}}
{{Noble House infobox
| name=House of Telcontar
| image = Rondador - House of Telcontar.png
| caption=Emblem of the house by Rondador
| othernames=
| founder=[[Aragorn|Elessar]]
| location=[[Reunited Kingdom]]
| affiliation=
| rivalry=
| destroyed=
| language=[[Westron]]
| members=[[Aragorn]], [[Eldarion]]
| race=[[Dúnedain]]
| distinctions=
| height=
| hair=
| skin=
| clothing=
| weapons=[[Andúril]]
| heirlooms=[[Crown of Gondor]], [[Elendilmir]], [[Elfstone]], [[Ring of Barahir]],<ref group="note">Nothing is said of the fate of the ring in the [[Fourth Age]], but unless it went with [[Arwen]] to her grave at [[Cerin Amroth]], it most likely passed to the Kings of the [[Reunited Kingdom]], descendants of Aragorn and Arwen.</ref> [[Sceptre of Annúminas]]
| gallery=the House of Telcontar
}}

The '''House of Telcontar''' was the Royal House of the [[Reunited Kingdom]] of [[Arnor]] and [[Gondor]] in the [[Fourth Age]]. The House was founded by [[Aragorn|Aragorn II]] after the [[War of the Ring]], who was the Heir of Elendil, and took the throne under the name Elessar.

== History ==
During the War of the Ring, [[Peregrin Took]], a companion of Aragorn's in the [[Fellowship of the Ring]], became a member of the elite Citadel Guard at [[Minas Tirith]], capital of Gondor. When Aragorn entered the city, Peregrin persisted in crudely referring to Aragorn by the nickname he had garnered as a Ranger of the North: "Strider", even in front of foreign dignitaries such as King [[Éomer]] of [[Rohan]]. Aragorn was amused and decided that the name of the lineage he founded would be "Telcontar", which means "Strider" in Quenya. Aragorn then took the royal name "Elessar".<ref name=Houses>{{RK|Houses}}, p. 863</ref>

With Queen [[Arwen]], King Elessar Telcontar reigned for 120 years, before finally surrendering his life. This long reign is attributed to Elessar's descent from the Men of [[Númenor]], who are blessed with long life (he was 87 when he took the throne). He rebuilt the old capital [[Annúminas]] in Arnor and later ruled from this northern capital, although the old capital Minas Tirith was still of great political importance. Elessar had one known son, [[Eldarion]], and an unspecified number of daughters. 

After Aragorn's death in {{FoA|120}},<ref name="Tale">{{App|Tale}}</ref> his son [[Eldarion]] took up the High Kingship.<ref name="Tale"/> One hundred years into his reign, he encountered a [[The New Shadow|new threat]], known only as the "[[Dark Tree]]".<ref>{{PM|Shadow}}</ref>

Of Eldarion, it was foretold that he should rule a great realm, and that it should endure for a hundred generations of [[Men]] after him, that is until a new age brought in again new things; and from him should come the kings of many realms in long days after. But if this foretelling spoke truly, none now can say, for [[Gondor]] and [[Arnor]] are no more; and even the chronicles of the House of Telcontar and all their deeds and glory are lost.<ref name="Third">{{PM|Third}}, text of manuscript T4 events after the end of the Third Age in the year 3021</ref>

== Etymology ==
The name ''Telcontar'' (pron. {{IPA|[telˈkontar]}}) was a translation into [[Quenya]] of Aragorn's common nickname in the north, "[[Strider (Aragorn)|Strider]]".<ref name=Houses/>

== Genealogy ==
{{familytree/start}}
{{familytree | ARA |y| ARW |ARA='''[[Aragorn|Elessar]]'''<br/><small>''{{TA|2931}} - {{FoA|120}}''</small>|ARW=[[Arwen]]<br/><small>''{{TA|241}} - {{FoA|121}}''</small>}}
{{familytree | |,|-|^|-|.| |}}
{{familytree | ELD | | SDS | ELD='''[[Eldarion]]'''<br/><small>''{{FoA|1}} - c. {{FoA|220}}''</small>|SDS=''several daughters''}}
{{familytree/end}}

{{references|notes}}
[[Category:House of Telcontar| ]]
[[Category:Mannish noble houses|Telcontar]]