{{Noble House infobox
| name=House of the Swallow
| image = Rondador - House of the Swallow.png
| othernames=Folk of the Swallow
| founder=
| leader=[[Duilin (elf of Gondolin)|Duilin]]
| location=[[Gondolin]]
| affiliation=[[House of the Heavenly Arch]]
| rivalry=
| destroyed=
| language=
| members=
| race=
| distinctions=
| height=
| hair=
| skin=
| clothing=White, blue, purple, and black
| weapons=Bow and arrows
| heirlooms=
}}
<center>{{quote|And those of the Swallow and the Arch poured arrows like the dark rains of autumn.|''[[The Book of Lost Tales Part Two]]'', "[[The Fall of Gondolin (chapter)|The Fall of Gondolin]]"}}</center>

The '''house of the Swallow''' was one of the [[twelve houses of the Gondothlim]], the kindreds of the elven city of [[Gondolin]]. Their story is recounted in the early version of the [[legendarium]] in ''[[The Book of Lost Tales]]''.

==History==
Their lord was [[Duilin (elf of Gondolin)|Duilin]], and the house was famed for their skill as archers: The emblem on their shields was that of an arrowhead, they wore a fan of feathers upon their helms, and were arrayed in white, dark blue, purple, and black. From this folk came the most numerous and best archers of [[Gondolin]], along with the [[folk of the Heavenly Arch]], so they were positioned in the broad places along the walls of the city.<ref name=Gondolin>{{LT2|III}}</ref>{{rp|173}} 

During the [[Fall of Gondolin]], the balrog [[Gothmog (balrog)|Gothmog]] gathered his armies at the northern gate and knocked it down. The folks of the Arch and the Swallow defended the northern walls, pouring rains of arrows over the hosts of [[Orcs]] and helping the houses that fought below. As the enemy's attack grew, Duilin fell from the walls, smitten by a fiery bolt from outside of the city.<ref name=Gondolin/>{{rp|176–8}}

When the northern gate was lost, [[goblins]] held a great part of the walls, so many elves of both the Arch and the Swallow were thrust to their doom. The [[house of the Fountain]] arrived to help, but a great gap was opened in the western wall, and bands of the Arch and the Swallow battled amid the wreck against oncoming enemies.<ref name=Gondolin/>{{rp|179–80}} Slowly the battle in that part of the city was lost and they retreated towards the [[Square of the Folkwell]], where the guard of the Arch, the Swallow and others gathered together, forming a good battalion. Led by [[Tuor]], they marched to the [[Square of the King]]. There they met [[Egalmoth|Egalmoth of the Heavenly Arch]], who had been on the south walls with some of his troops and folk of the Swallow. They later helped him to rescue captives and wandering soldiers.<ref name=Gondolin/>{{rp|182–3}} 

Many of them likely survived as [[Exiles of Gondolin|exiles]], as while crossing [[Cristhorn]], one of them informed Tuor that [[Glorfindel]] was being attacked by a band of [[Orcs]] and a [[Balrog]].<ref name=Gondolin/>{{rp|193}}

==Other names==
They were known as '''''Nos Duilin''''' in [[Gnomish]], and '''''Nossë Tuilinda''''' in [[Qenya]].<ref>{{LT2|Appendix}}, entry "Duilin"</ref>

Another Gnomish name was '''''Thlim Duilin''''', while a simple Qenya name was '''''Tuilindor'''''.<ref>{{PE|13}}, p. 104</ref>

{{references}}
{{HousesofGondolin}}
[[Category:Twelve houses of the Gondothlim]]
[[de:Haus der Schwalbe]]