{{infobox character
| people=[[Gondorians|Gondorian]]
| name=Hyarmendacil I
| image=Matěj Čadil - Hyarmendacil I of Gondor.jpg
| caption="Hyarmendacil I of Gondor" by [[Matěj Čadil]]
| pronun=
| othernames=''Ciryaher''
| titles=[[Kings of Gondor|King of Gondor]]
| position=
| location=[[Gondor]]
| affiliation=
| language=[[Westron]]
| birth={{TA|899}}
| birthlocation=
| rule={{TA|1015}} - {{TA|1149|n}} (134 years)
| death={{TA|1149}}
| deathlocation=
| age=250
| notablefor=
| house=[[House of Anárion]]
| parentage=[[Ciryandil]]
| siblings=
| spouse=
| children=[[Atanatar II]]
| gender=Male
| height=
| hair=
| eyes=
| clothing=
| weapons=
| steed=
}}{{Pronounce|Hyarmendacil.mp3|Ardamir}}
'''Hyarmendacil I''', born '''Ciryaher''' ([[Quenya|Q]], pron. {{IPA|[kiˈrʲaher]}}; {{TA|899}}<ref name=Elendil>{{PM|Elendil}}, manuscript C with corrections and expansions, The Southern Line of Gondor: the Anarioni, 15. Hyarmendakil I</ref> – {{TA|1149|n}}, aged 250 years<ref>{{App|South}}, ''Kings of Gondor'', Hyarmendakil I (Ciryaher)</ref>) was the fifteenth [[King of Gondor]] and the fourth and last of the [[Ship-king]]s.<ref name=Kings>{{App|South}}, ''Kings of Gondor''</ref>

==History==
Ciryaher was the son of King [[Ciryandil]], one of the [[Ship-kings]].<ref name=Ciryaher>{{App|Gondor}}, entry for king Ciryaher</ref>

Ciryaher ascended the throne after his father Ciryandil was slain during a siege of [[Umbar]] in {{TA|1015}}<ref>{{App|TA}}, entry for the year 1015</ref> by the [[Haradrim]], which were led by lords that had been driven from Umbar after it had been conquered by his grandfather [[Eärnil I]].<ref>{{App|Gondor}}, entry for king Eärnil I and for king Ciryandil</ref> The siege of Umbar lasted for many years, but the Haradrim could not take Umbar, because of the power of the ships of Gondor.<ref name=Ciryaher/>

Ciryaher began his reign by building up Gondor's army and navy, When he had assembled enough forces, Ciryaher came from Gondor by sea and by land. His armies crossed the river [[Harnen]] and completely defeated the Haradrim. The kings of the Men of Harad were forced to acknowledge the overlordship of Gondor in {{TA|1050}} and their sons lived as hostages in the court of the King of Gondor. After this victory he took the name ''Hyarmendacil'', which means "South-victor".<ref name=Ciryaher/>

During his reign [[Gondor]] reached its greatest extent and power. Gondor extended north to the [[Field of Celebrant]] and to the southern end of [[Mirkwood]], west to the river [[Greyflood]], east to the inland [[Sea of Rhûn]], south to the river Harnen and along the coast to the peninsula and haven of Umbar. The Men of the [[Vales of Anduin]] acknowledged the authority of Gondor. For the rest of his reign Gondor was at peace, because no enemies dared to attack Gondor. The watch on [[Mordor]] was maintained through great fortresses that guaraded the passes to Mordor.<ref name=Ciryaher/>

Hyarmendacil reigned for one hundred and thirty-four years, which was the longest reign of all the [[Kings of Gondor]] of the line of [[Anárion]], except [[Tarondor|one]].<ref name=Ciryaher/> He was the last of the [[Ship-kings]] and was succeeded by his lazy son [[Atanatar II|Atanatar II Alcarin]].<ref>{{App|Gondor}}, entry for king Atanatar Alcarin</ref>

==Etymology==
''Ciryaher'' is a name [[Quenya]]. Its meaning is not glossed, but as Paul Strack explains, it probably means "Ship Lord" and be a compound of [[cirya]] ("ship") and [[heru]] ("lord").<ref>{{webcite|author=Paul Strack|articleurl=https://www.eldamo.org/content/words/word-1566657597.html|articlename=Q. ''Ciryaher'' m.|website=Eldamo|accessed=28 July 2021}}</ref>

''Hyarmendacil'' is [[Quenya]]. It means "South-victor".<ref name=Ciryaher/> It is a compound of [[hyarmen]] ("south") and [[-ndacil|-(n)dacil]] ("victor").<ref>{{webcite|author=Paul Strack|articleurl=https://www.eldamo.org/content/words/word-2262790545.html|articlename=Q. ''Hyarmendacil'' m.|website=Eldamo|accessed=28 July 2021}}</ref>

== Genealogy ==
{{familytree/start}}
{{familytree | | | EAR | | |EAR=[[Eärnil I]]<br/><small>''{{TA|736|n}} - {{TA|936|n}}''†</small>}}
{{familytree | | | |!| | | |}}
{{familytree | | | CIR | | |CIR=[[Ciryandil]]<br/><small>''{{TA|820|n}} - {{TA|1015|n}}''†</small>}}
{{familytree | | | |!| | | |}}
{{familytree | | | HYA | | |HYA='''HYARMENDACIL I'''<br/><small>''{{TA|899|n}} - {{TA|1149|n}}''</small>}}
{{familytree | | | |!| | | |}}
{{familytree | | | ATA | | |ATA=[[Atanatar II]]<br/><small>''{{TA|977|n}} - {{TA|1226|n}}''</small>}}
{{familytree | |,|-|^|-|.| |}}
{{familytree | NAR | | CAL |NAR=[[Narmacil I]]<br/><small>''{{TA|1049|n}} - {{TA|1294|n}}''</small>|CAL=[[Calmacil (King of Gondor)|Calmacil]]<br/><small>''{{TA|1058|n}} - {{TA|1304|n}}''</small>}}
{{familytree/end}}

==Other versions of the legendarium==
A late manuscript of what would later become Appendix A also mentioned that after his victory over the kings of Harad, Gondor occupied all the land south of the mouths of the river [[Anduin]] up to the river [[Harnen]] and the borders of [[Near Harad]] and all the coastland as far as Umbar. It also mentions that Umbar became a great fortress and haven for the ships of Gondor and that only king [[Tarondor]] reigned longer than Hyarmendacil.<ref name=Elendil/>

{{references}}

{{seq-start}}
{{seq-head
| race=gondorian
| house=[[House of Anárion]]<small><br/>Cadet branch of [[House of Elros]]</small>
| born={{TA|899}}
| died={{TA|1149}}
}}
{{seq
| prev=[[Ciryandil]]
| list=15th [[Kings of Gondor|King of Gondor]]
| dates={{TA|1015}} - {{TA|1149|n}}
| next=[[Atanatar II|Atanatar&nbsp;II&nbsp;Alcarin]]
}}
{{seq-end}}
{{southernline}}
[[Category:Gondorians]]
[[Category:House of Anárion]]
[[Category:Rulers of Gondor]]
[[Category:Third Age characters]]
[[de:Hyarmendacil I.]]
[[fr:Hyarmendacil Ier]]
[[fi:Hyarmendacil I]]