{{plant infobox
| image=Ted Nasmith - Lúthien Escapes the Treehouse.jpg
| caption="Lúthien Escapes the Treehouse" by [[Ted Nasmith]]
| name=Hírilorn
| pronun=
| othernames=''Neldor''
| titles=
| position=
| location=[[Doriath]]
| affiliation=
| language=
| birth=
| birthlocation=
| rule=
| death=
| deathlocation=
| age=
| notablefor=
| parentage=
| siblings=
| spouse=
| children=
| race=
| gender=
| height=
| hair=
| eyes=
| clothing=
| weapons=
| steed=
}}
'''Hírilorn''' was an immense [[Beeches|beech-tree]] that grew over the gates of [[Menegroth]], the underground city of King [[Thingol]]. The tree was originally named '''''Neldor''''', meaning "Triple-tree", because of its three massive trunks.

==History==
During the time of the [[Quest for the Silmaril]], Thingol feared his daughter [[Lúthien]] would risk her life to seek out her love [[Beren]] and help him in his quest. He had a house built among the branches of the great beech and imprisoned Lúthien there. Because of this the tree was then called '''Hírilorn''', meaning "Tree of the Lady"<ref>{{S|Index}}</ref> in [[Sindarin]], though it did not hold Lúthien for long. Using her magical arts, she escaped from Hírilorn and set out to aid Beren, eventually helping him recover a [[Silmarils|Silmaril]] from [[Morgoth]]'s [[Iron Crown]]. 

Just as the Quest for the Silmaril began near Hírilorn the quest ended there as well. During the [[Hunting of the Wolf]], Beren received a mortal wound from [[Carcharoth]] and died in Lúthien's arms beneath the branches of the ''Tree of the Lady''.<ref>{{S|19}}</ref>

When [[Túrin]] was seventeen years old news from [[Dor-lómin]] ceased due to the vigilance of the servants of [[Morgoth]]. Túrin went looking for King [[Thingol]] to ask for mail, sword, and shield; he found the king with [[Melian]] sitting under Hírilorn. There they advised him and his wish for arms was granted.<ref>{{CH|5}}, pp. 82-85</ref>

==Etymology==
[[Christopher Tolkien]] translated ''Hírilorn'' as "Tree of the Lady": ''[[hîr]]'' + ''[[-il]]'' ("lady") + ''[[orn]]'' ("tree").<ref>{{S|Index}}</ref>

An obsolete name of the tree, used in the early [[Gnomish]] stage of the language, was ''Golosbrindi'' (glossed as "Queen of the Forest"), replaced with ''Hirilorn'' ("Queen of the Trees".<ref>{{LT2|In}}, p. 51</ref>

{{references}}
[[Category:Doriath]]
[[Category:Ilkorin locations]]
[[Category:Sindarin locations]]
[[Category:Trees]]