{{infobox character
| people=[[Arnor]]ian
| name=Ivorwen
| image=Born of Hope - Dírhael.jpg
| caption=Ivorwen (right) from ''[[Born of Hope]]''
| pronun=
| othernames=
| titles=
| position=
| location=[[Eriador]]
| affiliation=
| language=
| birth=before {{TA|2907}}<ref>{{App|TA}}, entry for the year 2907, p. 1088, the year of birth of Gilraen</ref>
| birthlocation=
| rule=
| death=
| deathlocation=
| age=
| notablefor=
| house=[[House of Isildur]]<ref name=PMTale>{{PM|Aii}}</ref>
| parentage=[[Gilbarad]]<ref name=PMTale>{{PM|Aii}}</ref>
| siblings=
| spouse=[[Dírhael]]
| children=[[Gilraen]]
| gender=Female
| height=
| hair=
| eyes=
| clothing=
| weapons=
| steed=
}}
'''Ivorwen''' was the wife of [[Dírhael]] and the mother of [[Gilraen]].<ref name=Tale>{{App|Tale}}, p. 1057</ref>

==History==
When [[Arathorn II|Arathorn]], the son of the [[Chieftains of the Dúnedain|Chieftain of the Dúnedain]] [[Arador]], wished to wed [[Gilraen]], Gilraen's father Dírhael was against this marriage, because Gilraen was still too young for marriage according to the customs of the Dúnedain and he foresaw that Arathorn would only have a short life. Ivorwen, however, also had the gift of foresight, and persuaded her husband to allow the marriage by saying that the days were darkening before the storm, and that hope might be born for the Dúnedain if Arathorn wedded Gilraen now instead of delaying the marriage. This was a small part to play in the history of [[Middle-earth]], but it had great consequences - the son of Arathorn and Gilraen was [[Aragorn]], who would one day reunite the ancient [[Kingdoms of the Dúnedain]]. Arathorn was slain when Aragorn was only two.<ref name=Tale/>

==Etymology==
''Ivorwen'' is a [[Sindarin]] name. Its meaning is not glossed, but it suggests the suffixal form of ''[[gwend]]'' ("maiden"). The meaning of the first element is unclear.<ref>{{webcite|author=Paul Strack|articleurl=https://www.eldamo.org/content/words/word-1181218907.html|articlename=S. ''Ivorwen'' f.|website=Eldamo|accessed=05 February 2022}}</ref>

== Genealogy ==
{{familytree/start}}
{{familytree | | | HOS | | | | | | |HOS=''[[House of Isildur]]''}}
{{familytree | | | |:| | | | | | | |}}
{{familytree | | | |:| | | | | | | |}}
{{familytree | | | ARA | | | | HOU |ARA=[[Arathorn I]]<br/><small>''{{TA|2693|n}} - {{TA|2848|n}}''†</small>|HOU=''[[House of Isildur]]''}}
{{familytree | |,|-|^|-|.| | | |:| |}}
{{familytree | ARG | | UNK | | GIL |ARG=[[Argonui]]<br/><small>''{{TA|2757|n}} - {{TA|2912|n}}''</small>|GIL=[[Gilbarad]]<br/><small>''b. {{TA}}''</small>|UNK=''unknown<br />child''<sup>[[Arathorn I#Other versions of the legendarium|NB]]</sup>}}
{{familytree | |!| | | |:| | | |!| |}}
{{familytree | ARA | | DIR |y| IVO |ARA=[[Arador]]<br/><small>''{{TA|2820|n}} - {{TA|2930|n}}''†</small>|DIR=[[Dírhael]]<br/><small>''b. {{TA}}''</small>|IVO='''IVORWEN'''<br/><small>''b. {{TA}}''</small>}}
{{familytree | |!| | | | | |!| | | |}}
{{familytree | ATH |~|y|~| GIR | | |ATH=[[Arathorn II]]<br/><small>''{{TA|2873|n}} - {{TA|2933|n}}''†</small>|GIR=[[Gilraen]]<br/><small>''{{TA|2907|n}} - {{TA|3007|n}}''</small>}}
{{familytree | | | | |!| | | | | | |}}
{{familytree | | | | ELE | | | | | |ELE=[[Aragorn II]] '''Elessar'''<br/><small>''{{TA|2931}} - {{FoA|120}}''</small>}}
{{familytree/end}}

==Other versions of the legendarium==
In a manuscript that was a close predecessor of Appendix A, Ivorwen is present at the naming of Aragorn and announces that he will have Kingly Valour (which is the translation of the name Aragorn). She also says that she sees a green stone on his breast that will be the origin of his true name and of what he will primarily be known for, because he will be a healer and a renewer. The other people present did not know what she meant, because Aragorn did not have a [[Elfstone|green stone]] yet; he only received it later from [[Galadriel]].<ref>{{PM|Foreword}}, ''Note on the text''</ref> 

Another manuscript of what would later become Appendix A mentions that Ivorwen was the daughter of Gilbarad and that she and her husband lived in a hidden fastness in the wilds of Eriador. It also mentions that both Ivorwen and Dírhael were descended from [[Isildur]], but not of the direct line of the Heirs of Isildur, and that they both had foresight in many things. Gilraen is said to have been younger than the age at which women of the Dúnedain usually married, and that she did not want to be a wife yet and asked her parents for advice about the proposed marriage. Dírhael is not said to have been against the marriage, but merely said that he foresaw that Arathorn would be the lord of the Dúnedain soon, but would not live long after that. Ivorwen then said that if they wedded, their child would be great and would bring the Dúnedain out of the shadows. Gilraen then agreed to the marriage, because of this advice from her parents.<ref name=PMTale/>

{{references}}

[[Category:Dúnedain]]
[[Category:Dúnedain of the North]]
[[Category:House of Isildur]]
[[Category:Sindarin names]]
[[Category:Third Age characters]]

[[de:Ivorwen]]
[[fi:Ivorwen]]
[[fr:encyclo/personnages/hommes/3a/dunedain/dunedain du nord/ivorwen]]