{{modernpeople infobox
| name=J.R. Titmass
| people=[[wikipedia:English people|Englishman]]
| image=
| caption=
| pronun=
| othernames=
| titles=Historian of Oxford<ref>{{SD|Index2}}, entry for "Titmass, J.R."</ref>
| position=Historian
| location=[[Oxford]]
| affiliation=
| language=[[wikipedia:English language|English]]
| birth=Sometime before [[2012]]
| birthlocation=[[Earth]]
| rule=
| death=Sometime after [[2014]]
| deathlocation=
| age=
| notablefor=
| house=
| family=
| parentage=
| siblings=
| spouse=
| children=
| gender=Male
| height=
| hair=
| eyes=
| clothing=
| weapons=
| steed=
| audio=
| audiocaption=
}}

'''J.R. Titmass''' was a [[Man]] who lived in [[wikipedia:Great Britain|Britain]] during the early [[wikipedia:21st century|21st century]].<ref name="Foreword">{{SD|2b}}, p. 156</ref>

== History ==
Mr. J.R. Titmass was a famous "historian of [[wikipedia:20th century|twentieth-century]] [[Oxford]]". When Mr. [[Howard Green]], the school clerk of the [[wikipedia:Examination Schools|Examination Schools]] in Oxford found the disordered bundle of [[The Notion Club Papers]] in the basement, Titmass assisted him in deciphering the papers in any way that he could. Indeed, it was Titmass who discovered that the name "[[Nicholas Guildford]]", used by the reporter of the [[Notion Club]], was in origin derived from ''[[The Owl and the Nightingale]]'',<ref name="intro">{{SD|2a}}, p. 149</ref> a medieval dialogue that was once read in Oxford.<ref name="Foreword"/>

After the publication of the first edition of the papers at an unknown date, Titmass informed Green that he couldn't "find any record in the" [[1940]]s of any of the other names given in the Papers. As a result, Green changed his view, writing in his Second Edition foreword in [[2014]] that he now assumed that if any such club existed at that period, the names would have to be pseudonyms.<ref>{{SD|2b}}, ''Note to the Second Edition'', pg. 158</ref>

== Other versions of the legendarium ==
In an early version of the Foreword, J.R. Titmass's original surname was '''Titmouse''' before [[J.R.R. Tolkien]] changed this to Titmass.<ref name="intro"/>

{{references}}

{{DEFAULTSORT:Titmass, J.R.}}

[[Category:Characters from the later Ages]]
[[Category:English people (in-universe)]]
[[Category:The Notion Club Papers]]