{{author infobox
| image = Johan Vanhecke.jpg
| name=Johan Vanhecke
| born=
| died=
| education=
| occupation=Curator of the AMVC-Letterenhuis
| location=Belgium
| website=
|}}
'''Johan Vanhecke''', from Belgium, is curator of the AMVC-Letterenhuis, the Flemish literary archive. He has published several books and articles on Flemish literature and folklore.<ref>"About the authors", in ''[[Lembas Extra: Proceedings of the 5th Unquendor Lustrum]]'', p.79.</ref> Vanhecke joined [[The Tolkien Society]] in 1979 (and later also other societies) and has published about [[J.R.R. Tolkien]] in Belgium, The Netherlands, Great Britain, USA and Poland.

In 1992, Vanhecke organized a successful Tolkien exhibition in Antwerp, Belgium, and he is the author of the Dutch book ''[[In de ban van de hobbit]]'' ("Under the spell of the hobbit"). 

==Bibliography==
<!-- Main part of bibligraphy submitted by Johan Vanhecke to User:Morgan through private message, on 16 September 2013 -->
===Books===
*[[1992]]: ''[[J.R.R. Tolkien, 1892-1992]]'' (Antwerpen, SBA/AMVC)
*[[2005]]: ''[[In de ban van de hobbit]]'' 

===Articles and book chapters===
* [[1980]]: [[Amon Hen 43|''Amon Hen'' 43]]
** "Old Tom Bombadil Was A ..."
* [[1980]]: ''Hexa'' 2
**"Het Mandala-Symbool in ''The Lord of the Rings''" (pp.&nbsp;28–44)
* [[1981]]: [[Amon Hen 50|''Amon Hen'' 50]]
** "Uyldert Review"
*[[1981]]: [[Mallorn 17|''Mallorn'' 17]]
**"Mandala Symblism in ''The Lord of the Rings'': A First Approach"
*[[1982]]: ''Hexa'' 10
**"Tolkiens Nagelaten Vertellingen" (pp.&nbsp;72–76)
*[[1983]]: ''De Mijnen van Moria. Essays over J.R.R.Tolkien'' (Antwerpen, EXA)
**"Literaire aspecten van Tolkiens werk" (pp.&nbsp;7–22)
*[[1987]]: ''[[Tolkien and the Spirit of the Age]]''
**"Swords and Alchemy" (pp.&nbsp;43–52)
*[[1988]]: ''Tentoonstelling [[Lode Claes]]'' (Stedelijk Museum "Het Toreke", Tienen)
**"Inleiding" (pp. [3-5] [Preface; Exhibition of Tolkien art])
*[[1989]]: ''Just Imagine'' 2 (April 1989)
**"Tolkien's Middle Earth. The Societies binnen de Society" (p.&nbsp;11)
*[[1989]]: ''Just Imagine'' 4 (November 1989)
**"Zwarte Magie bij de Tolkien Societies" (p.&nbsp;21)
*[[1990]]: ''Just Imagine'' 6 (January 1990)
**"Boer Gilles van Ham" (pp.&nbsp;10, 22)
*[[1991]]: ''[[Lembas (journal)|Lembas extra]]'' 1991
**"Aspects of Christ in Gandalf" (pp.&nbsp;63–75)
*[[1992]]: [[Mythlore 70|''Mythlore'' 70]] (Fall 1992)
**"Tolkien in Dutch" (pp.&nbsp;53–60)
*[[1994]]: ''Cirth de Gandalf'', nr. 30 (janvier 1994), nr. 31 (mars 1994)
**"Frodon est vivant! Les années légendaires des Sociétés tolkieniennes"
*[[1994]]: ''De Tijdlijn'' 11
**"De verhalen van Professor Tolkien" (pp.&nbsp;56–63)
*[[1996]]: [[The Tolkien Collector#Issue 12|''The Tolkien Collector'' nr. 12]]
**"Dutch Editions of Tolkien's Works" (pp.&nbsp;20–28)
*[[1996]]:  ''[[Beyond Bree]]'', December 1996 (pp.&nbsp;1–3)
**"Frodo lives! The legendary years of the Tolkien Societies"
*[[1997]]:  ''[[Beyond Bree]]'', January 1997 (pp.&nbsp;1–3)
**"Frodo lives! The legendary years of the Tolkien Societies"
*[[2000]]: ''Lothelanor'' (Tolkiengenootschap Elanor), jg. 1 juli 2000
**"Farmer Giles of Ham"
*[[2000]]: ''Lothelanor'' (Tolkiengenootschap Elanor), jg. 1 oktober 2000
**"Gandalf for President!"
*[[2001]]: ''Lothelanor'' (Tolkiengenootschap Elanor), jg. 2 oktober 2001
**"Mythologie & bomtrechters"
*[[2005]]: ''De Brakke Hond'' 88 (Herfst)
**"Tolkien en fantasy" (pp.&nbsp;23–35)
*[[2007]]: ''De Standaard der Letteren'' (20 april 2007)
**"Terug naar Midden-aarde"
*[[2007]]: ''De Leeswolf'', nr. 5
**"Een nieuw licht op J.R.R. Tolkien" (pp.&nbsp;339–340)
*[[2008]]: ''[[Lembas Extra: Proceedings of the 5th Unquendor Lustrum]]''
**"Tolkien and Belgium"

==External links==
* [http://www.tolkienlibrary.com/reviews/indebanvandehobbit.htm More information on In de Ban van de Hobbit by Johan Vanhecke]
* [http://www.tolkienlibrary.com/collecting/collectors/JohanVanhecke.htm Collector Profile]

{{references}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:Vanhecke, Johan}}
[[Category:Authors]]
[[Category:Belgian people]]
[[Category:People by name]]
[[Category:Tolkien Society members]]