{{disambig-two|a conflict in [[Gondor]]|[[Middle-earth Role Playing|MERP]] supplement|[[The Kin-strife]]}}
{{War
| previous=[[War of the Last Alliance]]
| next=[[Corsair Wars]]
| name=Kin-strife
| image=
| begin={{TA|1432}}
| end={{TA|1447}}
| place=Fought in the eastern lands of [[Gondor]], most notably in [[Osgiliath]] and [[Pelargir]]
| result=Victory for [[Eldacar]] and his followers
*Line of [[Eldacar]] restored
*Many [[Northmen]] emigrate to [[Gondor]]
*[[Umbar]] secedes under [[Corsair]] rule
| battles=[[Burning of Osgiliath]], [[Battle of the Crossings of Erui]], [[Siege of Pelargir]]
| side1=[[Gondorians]] (loyalists)<br>[[Northmen of Rhovanion]]
| side2=[[Gondorians]] (rebels)
| commanders1=[[Eldacar (King of Gondor)|Eldacar]]
| commanders2=[[Castamir]] †
}}
The '''Kin-strife''' was a disastrous civil war in [[Gondor]].
==History==
===Prelude===
The unrest that created the Kin-strife began when prince [[Valacar]], son of [[King of Gondor|King]] [[Rómendacil]], married a woman of the [[Northmen of Rhovanion]], [[Vidumavi]]. She bore him a son [[Eldacar (King of Gondor)|Eldacar]], but many [[Gondorians]] of [[Númenóreans|Númenórean]] blood were angered by this mixing of blood of lesser men and Númenóreans.<ref name="Gondor">{{App|Gondor}}</ref>

===Conflicts===
When Eldacar succeeded his father in {{TA|1432}}, the unrest grew into open rebellion, as many Gondorians saw Eldacar as a half-breed who had no right to rule. The chief of them was his second cousin [[Castamir]], who, as [[Captain of Ships]], was supported by [[Umbar]] and [[Pelargir]] and other coastal regions. In {{TA|1437}}, he led the confederates in open rebellion against the throne, [[Burning of Osgiliath|besieging Eldacar in Osgiliath]]. During the siege, [[Osgiliath]] was left in flames with the great [[Dome of Stars]] lost together with its ''[[palantíri|palantír]]'', the [[Osgiliath-stone]].<ref name="Gondor" /><ref name="ta">{{app|TA}}</ref>

Although he seized the throne for himself, Castamir quickly lost the support of the people of Gondor due to his cruelty and lack of generosity as demonstrated by the unnecessarily brutal sack of the city and the execution of [[Ornendil]], Eldacar's son and heir. His love for ships and fleets over the land which he ruled over added to his negative public approval. He also attempted to move the seat of the throne from Osgiliath to Pelargir, adding to his unpopularity amongst the populace in [[Ithilien]] and [[Minas Anor]].<ref name="Gondor" /> 

Eldacar fled in-exile to his mother's kin in [[Rhovanion]] and many Northmen in service to Gondor and Dúnedain of the northern provinces of Gondor flocking to him. Many of the Dúnedain had come to greatly respect him and many more came to hate Castamir, his usurper. There, Eldacar remained for a decade as he mediated war.<ref name="Gondor" />

A full decade later, in {{TA|1447|n}}, Eldacar returned with a great army from Rhovanion. Castamir's unpopularity resulted in many of the people living in [[Calenardhon]], [[Anorien]], and Ithilien to flock to Eldacar's banner. The two sides met at the [[Battle of the Crossings of Erui]] where much the best blood of Gondor was lost, until Eldacar managed to kill Castamir. But Castamir's sons and many of their supporters retreated to Pelargir. Eldacar [[Siege of Pelargir|besieged them]] by land until [[Third Age 1448|the next year]] when they sailed their way to the Haven of Umbar with all their forces. Eldacar could not follow them for he had no ships to beset them by sea.<ref name="Gondor" /><ref name="ta" />

===Aftermath===
Not only did Gondor lose the city of [[Umbar]] for four centuries, it gained a new enemy in the [[Corsairs of Umbar]], the followers of the descendants of Castamir's sons. Castamir's descendants established a lordship independent of Gondor's power, and thus a threat to its coastlands and all traffic by sea. The Corsairs remained at war with Gondor for many centuries until the reign of [[Aragorn II Elessar]] and they continuously contested their claim to the fief [[South Gondor]]. The loss of Umbar to Gondor also reduced Gondor's realm and influence in the south as its hold upon the [[Haradrim]] was loosened.<ref name="Gondor" />

Upon Eldacar's return to the throne, the blood of the [[House of Anárion]] and other noble families of the Dúnedain became mingled with lesser men; Gondor's population was replenished by large numbers of [[Northmen of Rhovanion|Northmen from Rhovanion]]. Much of the best blood of Gondor was killed during the [[Battle of the Crossings of Erui]].<ref name="Gondor" />

After the Kin-strife, the [[Kings of Gondor]] were generally cautious and watchful of those of near kin; the suspects often joined the rebels at [[Umbar]], or renounced their heritage and took wives of non-Númenórean blood, further weakening the Númenórean strain of the [[House of Anárion]]. The repercussions were still felt centuries later, in the time of the last king [[Eärnur]], when very few descendants of the Kings were alive; when he was lost in [[Minas Morgul]], no suitable heir could be found to succeed him.<ref name="Gondor" />

{{references}}

{{seq-start}}
{{seq
| prev=[[War of the Last Alliance]]
| list=Major events of [[Middle-earth]]
| dates={{TA|1432}} - {{TA|1447}}
| next=[[Great Plague]]
}}
{{seq-end}}
[[Category:Conflicts of the Third Age]]
[[Category:Wars]]
[[de:Sippenstreit]]
[[fr:encyclo/evenements/3a/guerres/lutte fratricide]]
[[fi:Sukuriita]]