{{unnamed}}
{{Poem infobox
| title="Where now the horse and the rider? Where is the horn that was blowing?"
| other names=
| written=Between [[February]] and midsummer of [[1942]]
| revised=Between [[1942]] and [[1954]]
| published=''[[The Two Towers]]'',<br>''[[The Collected Poems of J.R.R. Tolkien]]''
| subject=[[Eorl]]
}}

"'''Where now the horse and the rider? Where is the horn that was blowing?'''" is the first line of a [[Poems in The Lord of the Rings|poem]] written by [[J.R.R. Tolkien]] about [[Eorl]].

== Poem excerpt ==
<poem style="font-style:italic; margin-left:20px;">
Where now the horse and the rider? Where is the horn that was blowing? 
Where is the helm and the hauberk, and the bright hair flowing? 
Where is the hand on the harpstring, and the red fire glowing? 
Where is the spring and the harvest and the tall corn growing?<ref name=lotr>{{TT|III6}}, p. 508</ref></poem>

== History ==
A forgotten poet of [[Rohan]] had originally written it about [[Eorl the Young]] and his horse [[Felaróf]] long before the [[War of the Ring]].<ref name=lotr/>

In the year {{TA|3019}}, [[Aragorn]] sang a lament to characterize the [[Rohirrim]] as he, [[Gandalf]], [[Legolas]], and [[Gimli]] approached [[Edoras]]. He originally chanted it in [[Rohanese]]. After Legolas commented that the sound of the words resembled the land of Rohan, Aragorn recited his translation of it.<ref name=lotr/>

== Other versions of the legendarium ==
The earliest version of the poem, which may have been written "between [[February]] and midsummer" of [[1942]], "seems to be" more about "Eorl’s ride from the North" than the passing of time.<ref name=collectedpoems>{{CP|166}}</ref> Subsequently in the next manuscript,<ref name=collectedpoems/> Tolkien utilized the style of ''[[Wikipedia:The Wanderer|The Wanderer]]'',<ref name=collectedpoems/> which used a convention called ''[[Wikipedia:Ubi sunt|Ubi sunt]]''.<ref name=companion>{{HM|RC}}, p. 399</ref>

In a revision to the earliest versions of the chapter "[[The King of the Golden Hall]]", Tolkien wrote the verse that Aragorn utters into the story, though Eorl is referred to as "the Old" rather than "the Young".<ref name=early>{{TI|King}}, p. 443</ref>

== Inspiration ==
In a note to an early draft, [[Christopher Tolkien]] wrote that the verse echoes line 92 of ''The Wanderer'', an [[Old English]] poem.<ref name=note>{{TI|King}}, p. 449 (note 8)</ref>

It is possible that the first two lines of Aragorn's were inspired by the poem because it contains the words "[[mathom]]-giver" and "[[theoden]]".<ref>[[Stuart Lee]] & [[Elizabeth Solopova]], ''[[The Keys of Middle-earth]]'' (Second edition), "The Lord of the Rings", pp. 273-4</ref>
{|
|-
| <poem style="font-style:italic; margin-left:20px;">
'''Hwær cwom mearg?  Hwær cwom mago?'''
Hwær cwom '''maþþumgyfa?'''
Hwær cwom symbla gesetu?
Hwær sindon seledreamas?
Eala beorht bune!
Eala byrnwiga!
Eala '''þeodnes''' þrym!
Hu seo þrag gewat,
'''genap under nihthelm,'''
swa heo no wære.
</poem>
|| 
<poem style="font-style:italic; margin-left:20px;">
'''Where is the horse gone? Where the warrior?'''
Where is the treasure-giver?
Where are the seats at the feast?
Where are the revels in the hall?
Alas for the bright cup!
Alas for the mailed warrior!
Alas for the splendour of the prince!
How that time has passed away,
'''dark under the cover of night,'''
as if it never were.
</poem>
|}

== Portrayal in adaptations ==
'''2002: ''[[The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers]]'':'''
:Before the beginning of the [[Battle of the Hornburg|Battle]] of [[Helm's Deep]], [[Théoden]] recites some lines of the poem, lamenting how alone the Rohirrim stand. <blockquote>Where is the horse and the rider?<br/>Where is the horn that was blowing?<br/>They have passed like rain on the mountains,<br/>like wind in the meadow.<br/>The days have gone down in the West,<br/>behind the hills... into Shadow.</blockquote>
:The remaining lines are sung in Old English on the score in the background in the above and other scenes.

== External links ==
*{{webcite|author=Clamavi De Profundis|articleurl=https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2YTBgFmK_bs|articlename=The Lament for the Rohirrim - Clamavi De Profundis|dated=31 March 2018|website=YT|accessed=}}

{{references}}

{{poems}}

[[Category:Poems in The Two Towers]]