{{disambig-more|Last Debate|[[The Last Debate (disambiguation)]]}}
{{events
| image = Alan Lee - The Last Debate.jpg
| event=Last Debate
| othernames=
| location=Outside [[Minas Tirith]]
| date=[[March 16]] {{TA|3019}}
| result=Creation of the [[Army of the West]]
| partof=[[The War of the Ring]]
| participants=[[Aragorn]], [[Imrahil]], [[Gandalf]], [[Éomer]], [[Elladan]], [[Elrohir]]
| description=
| references=
| gallery=
}}
{{Quote|[...] This, I deem, is our duty. And better so than to perish nonetheless – as we surely shall, if we sit here – and know as we die that no new age shall be.|[[Gandalf]]}}

The '''Last Debate''' was the council that [[Aragorn]] held with [[Imrahil]], [[Gandalf]], [[Éomer]], [[Elladan]], and [[Elrohir]] outside [[Minas Tirith]] on [[16 March|March 16]], {{TA|3019|n}}.
==History==
After the [[Battle of Pelennor Fields]], Aragorn convened the Last Debate to decide their next course of action. Gandalf told the captains that they would not be able to defeat [[Sauron]] or his army through force of arms and that the one thing that would is [[The One Ring]]. He impressed upon them how important it was that the Ring be destroyed lest Sauron get it. He counselled them to create an army to march on the [[Black Gate]] to draw the [[Eye of Sauron]] away from [[Frodo]] and [[Sam]]. Éomer brought up concerns for the defence of Minas Tirith once the army left. In the end, they decided to leave behind 3,000 [[Rohirrim]] to attack a very large blocking force stationed on the [[West Road]] in [[Anórien]]; 4,000 who were coming by land from [[Pelargir]]; possibly several thousand who were coming up the [[Anduin]]; and the survivors from the siege of the city. This left the city better defended than it had been before the Battle of Pelennor Fields. Despite the knowledge that they were walking straight into a trap and some fears that Sauron would simply crush them without giving little thought to them, it was agreed that 7000 soldiers would leave Minas Tirith in two days.<ref>{{RK|Debate}}, pp. 878-82</ref> Also debated was whether to assail [[Minas Morgul]] which Gandalf strongly advocated against because of "evil that dwelt in the valley, where the minds of living men would turn to madness and horror" and the risk of drawing the Eye of Sauron too near to Frodo and Sam.<ref>{{RK|Gate}}, pp.884-5</ref>

The expeditionary force, known as the [[Army of the West]], numbered 7,000 men, and two days later on [[18 March]] they left for the Morannon. Of those that left, under [[Aragorn]] there were 2,000 of those who sailed with him up the [[Anduin]]; under [[Imrahil]] were 3,500 (probably from among the original defenders of the city); under [[Éomer]] were 500 [[Rohirrim]] unhorsed, and another 500 horsed; and lastly another 500 horsed Knights of [[Dol Amroth]], [[Rangers of the North]], and the two sons of [[Elrond]], [[Elladan]] and [[Elrohir]]. In total 6000 on foot and 1000 on horse.<ref>{{RK|Debate}}, pp. 881-81</ref>

==Portrayal in adaptations==
'''1980: [[The Return of the King (1980 film)|''The Return of the King'' (1980 film)]]:'''
:The only characters with dialogue, or to be positively identified over the course of the film, are Aragorn and Gandalf. No mention is made of the Ring.

'''1981: [[The Lord of the Rings (1981 radio series)|''The Lord of the Rings'' (1981 radio series)]]:'''
:

'''2003: ''[[The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King]]'':'''
:The debate is held in the throne room in Minas Tirith rather than outside the city. Imrahil and the sons of Elrond are absent, having been written out of the films, while [[Gimli]] and [[Legolas]] are in attendance.

{{references}}
[[Category:Events]]
[[Category:Third Age]]