{{people infobox
| name=Maiar
| image = Kimberly - Osse and Uinen.jpg
| caption="Osse and Uinen" by [[:Category:Images by Kimberly|Kimberly]]
| pronun=ˈmaɪ.ar
| othernames=the Beautiful, the Folk of the Valar
| origin=[[Creation of the Ainur]]
| location=[[Aman]], [[Middle-earth]]
| affiliation=
| rivalry=
| language=[[Valarin]], [[Quenya]], [[Sindarin]], [[Black Speech]], [[Westron]]
| members=[[Eönwë]], [[Ilmarë]], [[Ossë]], [[Uinen]], [[Sauron]], [[Gandalf]], [[Balrogs]], [[Melian]]
| lifespan=[[Immortality|Immortal]]
| distinctions=Emitting fragrance or stench when invisible
| height=
| hair=
| skin=
| clothing=
| weapons=
}}
The '''Maiar''' (plural for '''Maia)''' were those [[spirits]] which descended into [[Ëa]] to assist the [[Valar]] in the shaping of [[Arda]].<ref name=":0">[[J.R.R. Tolkien]], [[Christopher Tolkien]] (ed.), [[The Silmarillion|''The Silmarillion'']], [[Valaquenta|''Valaquenta'']], "Of the Maiar", p.23</ref> The Maiar and Valar were collectively known as the [[Ainur]], though the Maiar were of lesser power and majesty.<ref>[[J.R.R. Tolkien]], [[The Letters of J.R.R. Tolkien]]. [[Letter 325]], " From a letter to Roger Lancelyn Green", 17 July 1971</ref> Their number is unknown and few were named, and not all took visible shapes in [[Middle-earth]].<ref name=":1">[[J.R.R. Tolkien]], [[Christopher Tolkien]] (ed.), [[The Silmarillion|''The Silmarillion'']], [[Valaquenta|''Valaquenta'']], "Of the Maiar", p. 24</ref>

==History==
Chief among the Maiar were [[Eönwë]], the banner-bearer and herald of [[Manwë]]<ref name=":0" /> who led the [[Host of the Valar|Host of the West]] in the [[War of Wrath]],<ref>[[J.R.R. Tolkien]], [[Christopher Tolkien]] (ed.), ''[[The Silmarillion]]'', "''[[Quenta Silmarillion]]'': [[Of the Voyage of Eärendil and the War of Wrath]]"</ref> and [[Ilmarë]], the handmaid of [[Varda]].<ref name=":1" />

Also notable among the Maiar were [[Arien]], a maiden of [[Vána]], and [[Tilion]], a hunter of [[Oromë]]. Arien guided the vessel of the [[Sun]] through [[Ilmen]] and Tilion guided the [[Moon]]. They were given this task after [[Morgoth]] and [[Ungoliant]] destroyed the [[Two Trees of Valinor|Two Trees]], [[Laurelin]] and [[Telperion]], during the [[Darkening of Valinor]].<ref>[[J.R.R. Tolkien]], [[Christopher Tolkien]] (ed.), ''[[The Silmarillion]]'', "''[[Quenta Silmarillion]]'': [[Of the Sun and Moon and the Hiding of Valinor]]"</ref>

Each of the Maiar was associated with one or more particular Vala or Valie. For example, [[Ossë]] and [[Uinen]], as spirits of the [[Sea]], were vassals of [[Ulmo]].<ref name=":1" /> The Maia [[Salmar]]<ref>[[J.R.R. Tolkien]], [[Christopher Tolkien]] (ed.), ''[[The Silmarillion]]'', "Index of Names", entry "Salmar"</ref> - also of Ulmo's people - was the maker of the [[Ulumúri]], great horns through which Ulmo produced the music of the sea.<ref>[[J.R.R. Tolkien]], [[Christopher Tolkien]] (ed.), ''[[The Silmarillion]]'', "''[[Quenta Silmarillion]]'': [[Of the Beginning of Days]]"</ref> [[Melian]], who served the Valier Vána and [[Estë]],<ref name=":1" /> would later become wife to [[King of Doriath|King]] [[Thingol]] of [[Doriath]] and mother to [[Lúthien]].<ref>[[J.R.R. Tolkien]], [[Christopher Tolkien]] (ed.), ''[[The Silmarillion]]'', "''[[Quenta Silmarillion]]'': [[Of Thingol and Melian]]"</ref> [[Mairon]], originally a pupil of [[Aulë]] the Smith, later became known as the Dark Lord Sauron.<ref>[[J.R.R. Tolkien]], "Words, Phrases and Passages in Various Tongues in ''The Lord of the Rings''", in [[Parma Eldalamberon 17|''Parma Eldalamberon'' XVII]] (edited by [[Christopher Gilson]]), p. 183</ref> 

Also serving under Aulë's tutelage was [[Saruman|Curunír]],<ref name=":3">[[J.R.R. Tolkien]], [[Christopher Tolkien]] (ed.), ''[[Unfinished Tales]]'', "[[The Istari]]"</ref> who would later become known as Saruman the White. [[Aiwendil]], later known as [[Radagast]] the Brown, belonged to the people of [[Yavanna]].<ref name=":3" /> [[Gandalf|Olórin]], the wisest of the Maiar,<ref name=":1" /> was a servant to both [[Manwë]] and [[Varda]] - though he often found himself in the house of [[Nienna]], from whom he learned pity and patience.<ref>[[J.R.R. Tolkien]], [[Christopher Tolkien]] (ed.), [[The Silmarillion|''The Silmarillion'']], [[Valaquenta|''Valaquenta'']], "Of the Maiar", p. 25</ref> He would later be known as Gandalf the Grey.<ref>[[J.R.R. Tolkien]], [[Unfinished Tales]], Appendix: Note on the texts of "The Quest of Erebor"</ref> These three Maiar would come to be counted among the order of the [[Istar|''Istari'']], more commonly known as the "Wizards", who were sent by the Valar to assist the [[free peoples]] of Middle-earth in their efforts against Sauron in the [[Third Age]].<ref name=":3" />

Of the remaining two Wizards, little is told. Sent by the Vala [[Oromë]], they clad themselves in sea-blue and traveled together to the East and came to be called the ''[[Blue Wizards|Ithryn Luin]],'' or "Blue Wizards"''.''<ref group="note">The term "Blue Wizards" is mentioned only in an "essay" and is the only source where they are assigned a colour; although Tolkien revisited the concept of the remaining two Wizards, giving them different names and backgrounds, their assigned colour (whether blue or other) or title, is never specified again. However the term "Blue Wizards" is used by the fans to refer to all concepts of these two Wizards.</ref> Among their many varied names were Alatar and Palando,<ref name=":3" /> Morinehtar and Rómestámo,<ref>{{PM|Last}}, The Five Wizards, pp. 384-85</ref> as well as Palacendo and Haimenar.<ref>{{NM|Dates}}, entry DB 866/13, p. 95</ref> However, they never returned and their later fate is unknown.<ref>{{L|211}}</ref>

The [[Balrogs]] or ''Valaraukar''<ref>[[J.R.R. Tolkien]], [[Christopher Tolkien]] (ed.), [[The Silmarillion|''The Silmarillion'']], [[Valaquenta|''Valaquenta'']], "Of the Enemies", p. 26</ref> were of a separate class of spirits known as the [[Úmaiar]] who were corrupted by [[Morgoth|Melkor]].<ref>[[J.R.R. Tolkien]], [[Christopher Tolkien]] (ed.), ''[[Morgoth's Ring]]'', pp. 79 (commentary to §30), 165 (commentary to §18)</ref> Among these were [[Gothmog (balrog)|Gothmog]] and [[Durin's Bane]].

==Appearance==
The presence of the Maiar in their unclad (invisible) form was revealed by their fragrance.<ref>{{NM|P2xiv}}, p. 242</ref>

However, those of the Maiar which were corrupted by Melkor ([[Úmaiar]]) emitted a foul stench when invisible, which is why the Úmaiar never appeared unclad when trying to deceive or persuade the Eldar.<ref>{{NM|P2xiv}}, ''footnote'', p. 242</ref>

==Etymology==
The [[Quenya]] name ''Maiar'' means "the Beautiful".<ref>{{MR|P2a}}, p. 49</ref>

==Individuals==
*[[Arien]]
*[[Radagast|Aiwendil]]
*[[Blue Wizards]]
*[[Saruman|Curumo]]
*[[Eagles]] (according to Tolkien c. [[1970]])
*[[Eönwë]]
*[[Durin's Bane]]
*[[Gothmog (balrog)|Gothmog]]
*[[Ilmarë]]
*[[Sauron|Mairon]]
*[[Melian]]
*[[Gandalf|Olórin]]
*[[Ossë]]
*[[Salmar]]
*[[Tilion]]
*[[Uinen]]

==Other versions of the legendarium==
In the earliest forms of the legendarium, such as ''[[The Book of Lost Tales]]'', many beings are said to be among the lesser Ainur, including [[Nandini|dryads]] and [[mermaids]]. The concept of the Maiar was introduced in the reworking of the ''[[Annals of Valinor]]'' into the ''[[Annals of Aman]]'', and superseded most references to such beings.<ref name="MRP2b">{{MR|P2b}}, p. 56</ref>

[[Lungorthin]] was an early Balrog, though he did not show up in later writings.<ref>[[J.R.R. Tolkien]], [[Christopher Tolkien]] (ed.), ''[[The Lays of Beleriand]]'', "I. [[The Lay of the Children of Húrin]]", pp. 98, 102-3</ref>

In a c. [[1970]] text, J.R.R. Tolkien refers to the "mighty speaking eagles" as Maiar:<ref>[[J.R.R. Tolkien]], [[Carl F. Hostetter]] (ed.), ''[[The Nature of Middle-earth]]'', "Part Three. The World, its Lands, and its Inhabitants: VIII. Manwë's Ban", Footnote #3, p. 308</ref><blockquote>''...The most notable were those Maiar who took the form of the mighty speaking eagles that we hear of in the legends of the war of the Ñoldor against Melkor, and who remained in the West of Middle-earth until the fall of Sauron and the Dominion of Men, after which they are not heard of again.'' </blockquote>

==Notes==
{{references}}
{{ainur}}
[[Category:Ainur]]
[[Category:Maiar| ]]
[[Category:Quenya demonyms]]
[[Category:Races]]
[[de:Maiar]]
[[fr:encyclo/peuples/ainur/maiar]]
[[fi:Maiar]]