{{short description|Vicegerent of Eru}}
{{infobox character
| people=[[Valar|Vala]]
| name=Manwë
| image=Anna Kulisz - Manwe.jpg
| caption="Manwe" by [[:Category:Images by Anna Kulisz|Anna Kulisz]]
| pronun=[[Quenya|Q]], {{IPA|[ˈmanwe]}}
| othernames=''Súlimo'' ([[Quenya|Q]])<br />''[[Mānawenūz]]'' ([[Valarin|V]])<br />''Aran Einior'' ([[Sindarin|S]])<br />''Amân'' ([[Adûnaic|A]])
| titles=High King of Arda<br>Lord of the Breath of Arda<br />Vicegerent of Eru
| position=[[King of Arda]]
| location=[[Ilmarin]], [[Taniquetil]]
| affiliation=[[Eönwë]], [[Olórin]] and the [[Eagles]]
| language=
| notablefor=
| siblings=[[Morgoth]]
| spouse=[[Varda]]
| gender=Male
| height=
| hair=
| eyes=Blue<ref name=s1/>
| clothing=Blue<ref name=s1/>
| weapons=[[Sword of Manwë|Sword]]<ref>{{WJ|Last}}, p. 246</ref><ref>{{AA|50}}, p. 75</ref>
| steed=
}}
{{quote|Elves and Men revere Manwë most of all the Valar, for he has no thought for his own honour, and is not jealous of his power, but ruleth all to peace. Behold, the raiment of Manwë is blue, and blue is the fire of his eyes, and his sceptre is of sapphire which the Noldor wrought for him; and he is King of the world of gods and elves and men, and the chief defence against Melkor.|''[[Morgoth's Ring]]'', "[[Ainulindalë (Morgoth's Ring)|Ainulindalë]]"}}

'''Manwë Súlimo''' was the King of the [[Valar]], husband of [[Varda]] Elentári, brother of the [[Dark Lord]] [[Morgoth|Melkor]] (Morgoth), and '''High King of [[Arda]]'''. The winds, airs and birds were his servants. He was the greatest of the [[Ainur]] in authority, but not in power. The Lord of the Breath of Arda, he was appointed as its Ruler, hence his most common title, the '''Elder King'''.

==Attributes==
Manwë was the Ainu dearest to Eru, closest to his mind, and appointed his vicegerent on Earth. He was king, lord of Arda, and ruler of everything that dwells therein. His spouse is Varda, and they are seldom parted. His attributes are air and the winds, from the [[Veil of Arda]] to the small breezes. He also commands the birds.<ref name="vala" /> From the beginning, [[Ulmo]] has been his closest friend and ally. They come together when the vapors of the water become clouds high in the air. The two most faithfully served the purpose of Eru.<ref name="ai" /> 

He lived in [[Ilmarin|his halls]] atop Mount [[Taniquetil]], the highest mountain of the world. Together with Varda he could see farther than all other eyes. All things that flew in the light were his servants and brought him news from the farthest and deepest places of the world; save dark places in the deep that were Ulmo's domain<ref name="vala" /> or those hid by the black thought of powerful evil.

As the vicegerent of Eru on Earth, Manwë was a kind, compassionate ruler, unconcerned with his own power. Manwë dressed in blue robes and had blue eyes. He wielded a sceptre of sapphire made for him by the [[Noldor]]. The [[Vanyar]] were his favourite Elves, and they lived with him and Varda on Mount [[Oiolossë]], and he delighted in their songs and poetry.<ref name="s1">{{S|1}}</ref>

As every finite creature must have some weakness, Manwë's inherent fault was to become engrossed in amendment, healing, re-ordering — even ‘keeping the status quo’ — to the loss of all creative power and even to weakness in dealing with difficult and perilous situations. This applied to Manwë's dealings with Melkor, which were partly out of sheer fear of him, and partly out of desire to control him.<ref>{{MR|P5VI}}</ref>{{rp|522}}

==History==
In the thought of Ilúvatar, Manwë was the brother of Melkor, but dearest to Ilúvatar and the one that best understood the will of Eru.<ref name="vala">{{S|IIb}}</ref> When Melkor created the discord in the second [[Song of the Ainur]], Manwë took over leading the song, pondering about airs and winds.<ref name="ai">{{S|Ainu}}</ref> 

Manwë along with [[Aulë]] and Ulmo were the chief architects of Arda, and when it was formed, he denied to surrender it to Melkor. Many [[spirits]], like Varda, came to his side from the deeps of [[Ea]].<ref name="ai" />

He did not understand evil, even in the form of his own brother. He released Melkor from [[Mandos]], thus allowing him to cause the distrust of [[Fëanor]], the [[Darkening of Valinor|Poisoning]] of the [[Two Trees]], the murder of [[Finwë]], the theft of the [[Silmarils]], and the [[Fall of the Noldor|revolt]] of the [[Noldor]]. 

To hearten the [[Eldar]], he had Aulë fashion the Sun and the Moon, for he knew the rising of the [[Atani]] was coming soon, and sent [[Thorondor]] and the [[Great Eagles]] to watch them. 

After Morgoth's fall, Manwë cast him into the [[Void]]. In the [[Final Battle]], when Melkor escapes, it is said that the Elder King and the Dark Lord will battle on the Plains of [[Valinor]], but that they will not slay each other.

==Etymology==
''Manwë'' is intended to mean "Blessed One" in [[Quenya]], from [[root]] ''MAN'' plus the male ending ''[[-wë]]''. However it is said also to be a version of the [[Valarin]] name '''''Mānawenūz''''', which was the original [[Valarin]] name for Manwë. It meant "Blessed One, One (closest) in accord with Eru".<ref>{{WJ|AD1}}</ref>

==Other names==
'''''Súlimo''''' was a Quenya epithet meaning "Lord of the Breath of Arda",<ref name="vala" /> literally "Breather".<ref>{{PE|21}}, p. 85</ref> The [[Sindarin]] form was probably ''Thû''.<ref>{{PE|17}}, p. 124</ref> 

He bore the title of '''Elder King''',<ref>{{S|24}}</ref> '''''Aran Einior''''' in [[Sindarin]].<ref>{{PM|Shibboleth}}, p. 358</ref> Similar titles were '''High King of Arda'''<ref>{{S|9}}</ref> or '''King of Arda'''.<ref>{{S|2}}</ref><ref>{{S|7}}</ref>

In [[Adûnaic]], his name was '''''Amân'''''.<ref>{{SD|Drowning}}, p. 376</ref>

From the same root, ''[[The Etymologies]]'' give another epithet, ''Kalamando'' ("Light Mando"), being the light counterpart of ''[[Mandos|Morimando]]'' ("Dark Mando").<ref>{{LR|Etymologies}}, entry "MBAD"</ref>

In [[Eriol]]'s [[Old English]] translations, Manwë is referred to as ''Wolcenfréa'', consisting of ''wolcen'' ("sky, [[Wiktionary:welkin|welkin]]") + ''fréa'' ("ruler").<ref>{{SM|QA1}}, p. 208</ref>

==Genealogy==
{{familytree/start}}
{{familytree| |,|-|-|-|.| | | | | | |}}
{{familytree| MEL | | MAN |~| VAR | |MEL=[[Melkor]]|MAN='''MANWË'''|VAR=[[Varda]]}}
{{familytree/end}}

==Other versions of the legendarium==
In an early manuscript called "Valar name-list", Manwë has the additional [[Qenya]] names ''Taimo'' (masculine form of ''Taime'', "the sky") and ''Valtur'' ("King of the Valar").<ref>{{PE|14}}, p. 12</ref> Together with his wife, he was called '''''[[Wanwavoisi]]'''''.<ref>{{LT1|Appendix}}, entry "Súlimo"</ref>

His [[Gnomish]] names were '''''Man''''' and '''''Manweg'''''.<ref>{{LT1|Appendix}}, entry "Manwë"</ref>

==Inspiration==
Compared to real mythologies, Manwë represents possibly a [[Wikipedia:sky father|sky father]] like [[Wikipedia:Zeus|Zeus/Jupiter]] of the Greco-Roman mythology. Like Zeus, Manwë is both a [[Wikipedia:Sky deity|sky "deity"]] and a [[Wikipedia:King of the Gods|leader of his pantheon]] and is associated with the [[eagle]].

{{References}}

{{Ainur}}
{{Valar}}

{{DEFAULTSORT:Manwe}}
[[Category:Aratar]]
[[Category:Characters in The Book of Lost Tales]]
[[Category:Characters in The Silmarillion]]
[[Category:First Age characters]]
[[Category:Qenya names]]
[[Category:Quenya names]]
[[Category:Rulers in Aman]]
[[Category:Second Age characters]]
[[Category:Third Age characters]]

[[de:Manwe]]
[[fr:encyclo/personnages/ainur/valar/aratar/manwe]]
[[fi:Manwë]]