{{song
| title=Many Meetings
| album=[[The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring - Original Motion Picture Soundtrack]]
| composer=[[Howard Shore]]
| performer=[[Wikipedia:London Philharmonic Orchestra|London Philharmonic Orchestra]]
| image=The_Lord_of_the_Rings_-_The_Fellowship_of_the_Ring_-_Original_Motion_Picture_Soundtrack.jpg
| duration=3:05
| track=9
| previous=[[Flight To The Ford (soundtrack)|Flight to the Ford]]
| next=[[The Council Of Elrond (soundtrack)|The Council of Elrond]]
| spotify=https://open.spotify.com/track/0VfcYOujgf9JDAgwlgu1qm
}}
'''Many Meetings''' is the ninth track of ''[[The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring - Original Motion Picture Soundtrack]]'' by [[Howard Shore]].  It is played during the beginnings of the Hobbits' time in [[Rivendell]].

The track begins with the Rivendell theme: the regular, somewhat mysterious arpeggios in strings and reeds with steady, high vocals.  It smoothly turns into the Shire "[[In Dreams]]" theme, dropping the vocals.  This quickly turns into a single clarinet playing the syncopated variant.  All this time the music stays smooth and quiet.  The strings take over the melody, while the brass plays softly in the background in unsually long notes.  The clarinet plays the syncopated rhythm again, but it doesn't last as long, and merges back into a flute playing the Rivendell theme with the steady vocals.  The music again returns to the "In Dreams" theme on strings.  It ends on a long note of strings that fades out.
{{title}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:09}}
[[Category:The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring - Original Motion Picture Soundtrack]]