{{author infobox
| image = Marcel Bülles.jpg
| name=Marcel Bülles
| born=
| died=
| education=University of Cologne
| occupation=Freelance journalist and translator
| location=Cologne, Germany
| website=
}}
'''Marcel R. Bülles''' is a German freelance journalist and translator.
==Biography==
Bülles has collaborated with Professor [[Michael D.C. Drout]] in research on [[J.R.R. Tolkien]], assisted in the preparation of the academic yearbook ''[[Tolkien Studies (journal)|Tolkien Studies]]'', and contributed a few articles for the ''[[J.R.R. Tolkien Encyclopedia]]''.

He is the founding chairman of the [[German Tolkien Society]] (1997) and has been the European Representative of the Tolkien Society, UK. He has initiated the first regular annual academic conference in Germany on Tolkien (Tolkien Seminar) and is a co-founder of [[Ring*Con]], Europe's largest and the first ever film trilogy convention. 

A well-known speaker on various Tolkien-related events, he has given talks in the US, Canada, Switzerland, UK and Italy. He held a position as a member of the Board of Editors of the German Tolkien Society's academic yearbook ''[[Hither Shore (journal)|Hither Shore]]''.

Bülles takes a special interest in international relationships between Tolkien societies throughout the world and since 2003 the GTS has been inviting chairmen and chairwomen to their annual main event, the [[Tolkien Thing]], including Israel, Greece, Belgium and France. In 2005 he invited four European Tolkien societies to join a friendship agreement informing each member of the union to keep all others informed about events, publications etc. France, Belgium and Austria joined. 

He is an honorary member of the [[Greek Tolkien Society]] and attended ''Cair Andros'' in 2007. He is also an honorary member of the [[German Tolkien Society]].

==Bibliography, selected==
===Articles===
*[[1995]]: [[Amon Hen 134|''Amon Hen'' 134]]
**"Death of a Dunadan"
*[[1996]]: [[Amon Hen 138|''Amon Hen'' 138]]
**"Cirdan - One of Unknown Heroes"
*[[1997]]: [[Amon Hen 148|''Amon Hen'' 148]]
**"Report: Oxonmoot"
*[[2000]]: [[The Best of Amon Hen|''The Best of Amon Hen'' Part 1]]
**"Death of a Dunadan"
**"Cirdan - One of Unknown Heroes"
* [[2004]]: [[Hither Shore 1|''Hither Shore'' 1]]
** "Tolkien Criticism — reloaded"
* [[2006]]: ''[[J.R.R. Tolkien Encyclopedia: Scholarship and Critical Assessment]]''
** "Merchandising", "Thingol"
* [[2010]]: [[Mallorn 50|''Mallorn'' 50]]
** "Envisaging the future" (guest editorial)
* [[2013]]: [[Mallorn 54|''Mallorn'' 54]] 
** "A journey to the cinema" (review of ''[[The Hobbit: An Unexpected Journey]]'')
* [[2020]]: [[Mallorn 61|''Mallorn'' 61]]
** "Oxford, New York City, Paris: The Tolkien Exhibitions 2018-2020"

==External links==
* '''[http://www.thetolkienist.com/ The Tolkienist]'''
* [http://www.marcel-buelles.de/ Personal website]

{{DEFAULTSORT:Bulles, Marcel}}
[[Category:Academics]]
[[Category:Authors]]
[[Category:German people]]
[[Category:JRRTE contributors]]
[[Category:People by name]]
[[Category:Translators]]