{{infobox character
| people=[[Northmen|Northman]]
| name=Marhari
| image=
| caption=
| pronun=
| othernames=
| titles=
| position=Lord of the [[Northmen]] of [[Rhovanion]]
| location=[[Rhovanion]]
| affiliation=
| language=Language of the [[Éothéod]]
| birth=
| birthlocation=
| rule=
| death={{TA|1856}}
| deathlocation=[[Battle of the Plains]]
| age=
| notablefor=
| house=
| parentage=Unknown; descendant of [[Vidugavia]]
| siblings=
| spouse=
| children=[[Marhwini]]
| gender=Male
| height=
| hair=
| eyes=
| clothing=
| weapons=
| steed=
}}
'''Marhari''' was a [[Northmen|Northman]] descended from the [[Rhovanion|Kingdom of Rhovanion]] and a member of the royal house. His distant ancestor was King [[Vidugavia]].<ref>{{UT|8e}}, Note 5</ref>

In {{TA|1851}},<ref>{{App|TA}}, entry for the year 1851 of the Third Age</ref> a tribe of [[Easterlings]] called the [[Wainriders]] began invading from the [[East]]. Marhari led the soldiers of Rhovanion, together with the armies of [[Gondor]] under King [[Narmacil II]], against the invaders at the [[Battle of the Plains]]<ref name="Cirion">{{UT|Northmen}}</ref> in {{TA|1856|n}}.<ref>{{App|TA}}, entry for the year 1856 of the Third Age</ref> The battle was a disaster, as Narmacil was killed and Marhari fell in his rearguard. The Wainriders then overran Rhovanion and enslaved its people.<ref name="Cirion"/>

Marhari's son [[Marhwini]] led a group of refugees west to the [[Vales of Anduin]]. They would become the Éothéod, the ancestors of the mighty [[Riders of Rohan]].<ref name="Cirion"/>

==Etymology==
[[Christopher Tolkien]] suggests that the name ''Marhari'' is "[[Gothic]] in form" and that it contains the Gothic element ''marh'' ("horse"), which corresponds to [[Old English]] ''mearh'' ("horse") whose plural is ''mearas''.<ref>{{UT|8e}}, Note 6</ref>

[[David Salo]] and [[Arden R. Smith]] suggest that the name is early [[Old English]] in form.<ref>[[David Salo]], Re: Digest: Radagast etc., e-mail to the Tolkien Language List (19.22), 10 July 1996, http://tolklang.quettar.org/messages/Vol19/19.22; Re: Digest: More Radagast etc., e-mail to the Tolkien Language List (19.36), 16 July 1996, http://tolklang.quettar.org/messages/Vol19/19.36; and Re: Gothic/Old English and pseudo-Latinized forms of same, e-mail to the Tolkien Language List (19.46), 18 July 1996, http://tolklang.quettar.org/messages/Vol19/19.46</ref><ref>[[Arden R. Smith]], Tolkienian Gothic, in [[Wayne G. Hammond]] & [[Christina Scull]], [[The Lord of the Rings 1954-2004]]: Scholarship in Honor of Richard E. Blackwelder, p. 269</ref>

It is also possible that it is an Old High German (OHG) name, which means "horse-soldier" (literally "horse-army(man)") and consists of the element ''marh'', which corresponds to Gothic ''*marhi'' ("horse"), and the element ''hari'' ("army"), which corresponds to Gothic ''harjis'' ("army").<ref>{{webcite|author=Friedrich Kluge|articleurl=https://archive.org/details/etymologicaldict00kluguoft/page/224/mode/2up|articlename=Etymological Dictionary of the German language, entry Mähre, p. 224 and entry Heer, p. 139|website=archive.org|accessed=16 January 2023}}</ref>

In [[Old English]] the element ''hari'' became ''here'' and is seen in the later [[Rohanese]] name [[Dúnhere]], which translates as "hill warrior".<ref>{{HM|RC}}, p. 571</ref>

David Salo suggests that it could mean "He who has an army of horses" or "cavalry general". [[Tom Shippey]] suggests that it means "horse army" and that it is not Gothic, but in a hypothetic reconstructed language, in proto-germanic.<ref>Didier Salamon & David Giraudeau, Le Livre de la Marche, 2006, p. 159</ref>

== Genealogy ==
{{familytree/start}}
{{familytree | VID |VID=[[Vidugavia]]<br/><small>''fl. {{TA|1250|n}}''</small>}}
{{familytree | |:| |}}
{{familytree | |:| |}}
{{familytree | MAR |MAR='''MARHARI'''<br/><small>''d. {{TA|1856|n}}''†</small>}}
{{familytree | |!| |}}
{{familytree | MAN |MAN=[[Marhwini]]<br/><small>''fl. {{TA|1856|n}} - {{TA|1899|n}}''</small>}}
{{familytree | |!| |}}
{{familytree | FOR |FOR=[[Forthwini]]<br/><small>''fl. {{TA|1944|n}}''</small>}}
{{familytree/end}}

{{references}}
[[Category:Gothic names]]
[[Category:Northmen]]
[[Category:Rulers in Middle-earth]]
[[Category:Third Age characters]]
[[de:Marhari]]
[[fi:Marhari]]
[[fr:encyclo/personnages/hommes/3a/hommes du nord/marhari]]