{{Person infobox
| image = Mary Fairburn.png
| name = Mary Fairburn
| born = 13 June 1933
| education = Winchester School of Art and the Institute of Education
| occupation = Illustrator
}}

'''Mary Fairburn''' ([[13 June]] [[1933]]) is an English artist and musician, best known for her illustrations for [[The Lord of the Rings|''The Lord of the Rings'']]. Her illustrations, unknown until [[2012]], were published as a body by [[HarperCollins]] in the Official [[Tolkien Calendar 2015|''Tolkien Calendar 2015'']]. 
==History==
===Early life===
Born in London, Fairburn was educated at St. Swinthun's School for Girls and later studied at the Winchester School of Art and the Institute of Education in London. In the mid-1950s, Fairburn taught art at St. Bonaventure's Boys' School Forest Gate and, in [[1958|1958,]] took a job at Masjid-i-Sulieman, Iran, teaching art and music to the children of the employees of an American oil company.<ref>Brian J. Robb, Paul Simpson ''[https://books.google.com/books?id=72r0AwAAQBAJ&pg=PA213#v=onepage&q&f=false Middle-earth Envisioned: The Hobbit and The Lord of the Rings: On Screen, On Stage, and Beyond],'' p. 213</ref>
===Illustrations of Tolkien's works===
After reading the Lord of the Rings for the first time, Fairburn a created suite of pictures based on the novel and sent them to [[J.R.R. Tolkien|Tolkien]] in May of [[1968]]. He wrote back in strongly approving terms.
In a subsequent letter, he wrote:<blockquote>After seeing your specimens I am beginning to change my mind [that is, about not having The Lord of the Rings illustrated], and I think that an illustrated edition might be a good thing.<ref>[[Letter to Mary Fairburn (May 1968)]]</ref></blockquote>However, soon after this, Tolkien broke his leg in a fall, and was hospitalised; Fairburn was in difficult financial circumstances and needed to urgently pursue more immediately rewarding work, and the [[J.R.R. Tolkien|Tolkien]] family home in Oxford was packed up for a move to the English south coast. As a result of these disruptions the negotiations between the writer and artist went no further.<ref>Paul Tankard, Akin to my own Inspiration: Mary Fairburn and the Art of Middle-earth". ''[[Tolkien Studies (journal)|Tolkien Studies]], 2017''</ref>

==Notable letters==
*[[Letter to Mary Fairburn (May 1968)]]
*[[Letter to Mary Fairburn (4 September 1968)]]
*[[Letter to Mary Fairburn (10 October 1968)]]
*[[Letter to Mary Fairburn (4 November 1968)]]
{{DEFAULTSORT:Fairburn, Mary}}
[[Category:Artists]]
[[Category:British people]]
[[Category:Letter receivers]]
[[Category:People by name]]
<references />