{{disambig-more|Men|[[Men (disambiguation)]]}}
{{race infobox
| name=Men
| image = Ted Nasmith - Felagund Among Bëor’s Men.jpg
| caption="Felagund Among Bëor's Men" by [[Ted Nasmith]]
| pronun=
| othernames=Atani, Secondborn, Hildor, Apanónar
| origin=[[Children of Ilúvatar]]
| location=[[Hildórien]], [[Beleriand]], [[Númenor]], [[Gondor]], [[Arnor]], [[Rohan]], [[Dunland]], [[Harad]], [[Khand]], [[Forochel]], [[Rhûn]], [[Rhovanion]]
| affiliation=
| rivalry=[[Orcs]]
| language=[[Taliska]], [[Adûnaic]], [[Sindarin]], [[Rohanese]], [[Westron]], [[Quenya]]
| people=[[House of Bëor|Bëorians]], [[House of Haleth|Haladin]], [[House of Hador|Hadorians]], [[Easterlings]], [[Númenóreans]], [[Black Númenóreans]], [[Dúnedain]], [[Dúnedain of Arnor|Arnorians]], [[Gondorians]], [[Corsairs of Umbar|Corsairs]], [[Forodwaith (people)|Forodwaith]], [[Haradrim]], [[Rohirrim]], [[Dunlendings]], [[Men of Dale]], [[Beornings]], [[Bardings]], [[Drúedain]], [[Hobbits]]
| members=[[Bëor]], [[Hador]], [[Barahir]], [[Beren]], [[Húrin]], [[Morwen]], [[Túrin]], [[Niënor]], [[Tuor]], [[Elros]], [[Ar-Pharazôn]], [[Elendil]], [[Isildur]], [[Bard]], [[Denethor]], [[Boromir]], [[Faramir]], [[Théoden]], [[Éomer]], [[Éowyn]], [[Aragorn]]
| lifespan=Original Men before the [[Tale of Adanel|Fall]] - c. 200-300 years<ref>{{NM|P2x}}, p. 223</ref><ref>{{NM|P3xii}}, ''Text 2'', p. 330</ref><br />[[Middle Men]] - c. 80 years<br/>[[Númenóreans]] - c. 200+ years<ref name=Line>{{UT|Kings}}</ref><br />[[Kings of Númenor]] - c. 400 years<ref name=Line/><br />[[Dúnedain]] - Thrice the life of [[Middle Men|lesser Men]] but later slightly diminished<ref>{{App|Eriador}}</ref><br />[[Hobbits]] - c. 100 years<br />[[Drúedain]] - Shorter<ref>{{UT|Druedain}}</ref>
| distinctions=[[Gift of Men|Mortality]], [[Dominion of Men|rulers]] of [[Middle-earth]] 
| height=Dúnedain - 6'4" (average)<ref name=Galadriel>{{UT|Galadriel}}</ref><br />Númenóreans - 7'0" (average)<ref>{{PM|X}}, p. 310.</ref><br />[[Middle Men]] - Shorter<br />Drúedain - 4' to 5'<br />Hobbits - 3'6" (average)
| hair=Black, brown, chestnut, blond, auburn, red, and (when older) grey or white
| skin= Fair, pale, sallow, ruddy, tan, dark tan, light brown, dark brown, black 
| clothing=
| weapons=Swords, knives, bows, axes, spears
}}
{{quote|West, North, and South the children of Men spread and wandered, and their joy was the joy of the morning before the dew is dry, when every leaf is green.|''[[Quenta Silmarillion]]'', "[[Of Men]]"}}
'''Men''' were one of the Kindreds of the [[Children of Ilúvatar]]. Men were called the Secondborn (or the Second Kindred<ref>{{PE|17}}, p. 89</ref>) by the [[Elves]], their [[Elves|Elder]] brethren, because they were the last of all the [[incarnate]] races to come into being. Though they were born after the other sentient races, Men were destined to inherit and [[Dominion of Men|rule]] [[Middle-earth]].

==Origins and nature==
The race of Men is the second race of beings created by Eru [[Ilúvatar]]. Because the [[Elves]] [[Awakening of the Elves|awoke]] in the beginning of the [[First Age]], and Men [[Awakening of Men|awoke]] millennia later, when the [[Sun]] first rose in the heavens late in the [[Age]], they are called the Secondborn ([[Quenya]]: ''Atani'', [[Sindarin]]: ''[[Edain]]'') by the Elves. Men awoke in a land located in the far [[east]] of Middle-earth called [[Hildórien]]. When the [[Sun]] rose for the first time in the far [[West]], Men began to wander towards it, a journey which culminated in some of them reaching [[Beleriand]] centuries later.

There is much evidence that, soon after their awakening, [[Morgoth]] came to Men and incited them to worship him and turn away from Ilúvatar, and that they complied. Though all were seduced by the Enemy, some Men repented and escaped; some of them were the ancestors of the Edain, the [[Elf-friends]].

Men bear the so-called ''[[Gift of Men]]'', mortality. Elves are immortal, in the sense that even if their bodies are slain, their spirits remain bound to the world, going to the [[Halls of Mandos]] to wait until they are released or the [[the End|world ends]]. In contrast, Men are released from [[Arda]] and the bounds of the world and have rest from its troubles. Ilúvatar also gifted Men with the freedom to shape their own future, being rather free from the designs of the [[Music of the Ainur]].<ref>{{S|1}}</ref> However, the influence of Morgoth has caused Men to fear their fate, and view Death as a Doom instead of a Gift.

== Before their coming to Beleriand ==
Men had a knowledge of metals and some smith-craft before they reached Beleriand,<ref>{{UT|12}}</ref> acquired, according to their own legends, from the [[Dwarves]].<ref>{{UT|12c}}, "10"</ref>

== Groups and alignments ==
Although all Men are related to one another, there are many different groups with different cultures. The most important group in the tales of the [[First Age]] were the Edain. Although the word Edain technically refers to all Men, the Elves used it to distinguish those Men who fought with them in the First Age against [[Morgoth]] in [[Beleriand]]. The Edain were divided into three Houses. 

The First House of the Edain was the [[House of Bëor]], and entered Beleriand in {{FA|310}} and were granted the fief of [[Ladros]] in [[Dorthonion]] by [[Finrod|Finrod Felagund]]. The Second House of the Edain, the [[Haladin]], was led by Haldad and later by his daughter Haleth and settled in the Forest of Brethil. The Third House, which became the greatest, was led by [[Marach]] and later his descendant [[Hador]], and they settled in [[Dor-lómin]]. This house was known both as the House of Marach and the [[House of Hador]].

Other Men did not cross the [[Misty Mountains]] or fight against Morgoth. However, some, such as the Easterlings, fought openly on his side. In later Ages, the Haradrim and Easterlings would fight on Sauron's side against the descendants of the Edain. Here below follow the short descriptions of the most important groups of Men in the First, Second and Third Ages.

===Edain and Dúnedain===
As a reward for their services and assistance rendered to the Elves and the Valar in the [[War of Wrath]] at the end of the First Age, the [[Edain]] received a new land of their own from the Valar, between Middle-earth and the [[Undying Lands]]. This was the land of [[Númenor]], an island in the form of a five-pointed star that was far away from the troubles of Middle-earth. 

They were led to this island by [[Elros]] with the help of his father [[Eärendil]], who sailed the heavens as the bright star of the same name and guided the ships of the Edain to Númenor. Once they arrived, Elros became the first King of Númenor and took the name Tar-Minyatur. The Edain became known as the [[Númenóreans]] or [[Dúnedain]] (Sindarin for ''Men of the West''). The kingdom of Númenor grew steadily in power, and the Dúnedain became the noblest and highest of all Men on Arda. In their early days, the Dúnedain remained allied to the Elves of Middle-earth, and aided them in battle against Morgoth's lieutenant [[Sauron]]. 


As the Men of the West increased in power and happiness, they came to resent the Gift of Men, Death. They wished to become immortal like the Elves and enjoy their possessions for all time. Most of the Númenóreans, including the line of the Kings, began to turn away from the Valar, and spoke against the Ban of the Valar that forbade them to sail west beyond sight of Númenor or to enter [[Valinor]]. The Númenóreans also became increasingly hostile to all Elvish influences in their realm, and in {{SA|2899|n}} of the [[Second Age]], Ar-Adûnakhôr became the first king of Númenor to take his royal name in [[Adûnaic]], the language of Men, instead of [[Quenya]], the tongue of the Elves of Valinor.

During the early part of their rebellion, the Númenóreans became divided into two factions: the first, the [[King's Men]], enjoyed the support of the King and included the majority of the people. They wished to gain immortality and break away from their  ancestral allegiance to the Valar. The King's Men also wanted to end relations with the Elves, and thus they favoured Adûnaic as the official language and eventually punished those who spoke the Elven tongues. The persecuted minority faction, the [[Faithful]], were led by the [[Lords of Andúnië]], the westernmost province of Númenor, and remained loyal to the Valar. They also tried to maintain friendship with the Elves.

When Sauron was apparently defeated and taken to the Isle by the Númenórean army near the end of the Second Age, he took advantage of the pride of the Númenóreans. By teaching the Dúnedain many things and flattering the King, [[Ar-Pharazôn]], he worked his way into the King's counsels and won the hearts of the people. Ultimately, Sauron advised Ar-Pharazôn to attack Valinor and claim immortality. This he foolishly did, and as a punishment Númenor, the island of the Men of the West, sank into the Sea and only the Faithful escaped. When the Faithful returned to Middle-earth, they founded the twin kingdoms of [[Gondor]] and [[Arnor]].

===Black Númenóreans and Haradrim===
The Faithful weren't the only Númenóreans left on Middle-earth when Númenor sank. When Númenor grew in naval power, many Númenóreans founded colonies in Middle-earth. Many of the King's Men settled in Middle-earth because they wanted to conquer more lands, and the Faithful because they were persecuted by the Kings. The Faithful settled in [[Pelargir]], while the King's Men ruled the [[Umbar|Haven of Umbar]] and other colonies in the South. When Númenor was destroyed, the King's Men became known as the Black Númenóreans and remained hostile towards the Faithful of Gondor. Eventually, Umbar was conquered by Gondor in {{TA|933|n}} of the Third Age.

In Harad another group of Men lived called the '''[[Haradrim]]''' or [[Southrons]]. They were dark skinned Men and waged war on great Oliphaunts or ''Mûmakil''. They too were hostile to Gondor, though they were subdued in {{TA|1050}} by [[Hyarmendacil I]].

Both Umbar and the Harad were left unchecked by Gondor's waning power by the time of the War of the Ring, and presented grave threats from the south. Many Haradrim fought with Sauron's forces in Gondor in that War.

===Easterlings===
{{main|Easterlings}}
Most Men who fought in the armies of Morgoth and Sauron were [[Easterlings]] who came from the regions beyond the [[Sea of Rhûn]]. Some Easterlings offered their services to the Elvish kingdoms in Beleriand; among them were [[Bór]] and his sons, and [[Ulfang the Black]] and his sons. This proved to be disastrous for the Elves in the [[Nirnaeth Arnoediad]] when Ulfang and his clan switched sides and defected to Morgoth, though Bór and his sons died bravely fighting on the side of the [[Eldar]]. 

After Morgoth's defeat Sauron extended his influence over the Easterlings, and although Sauron was defeated by the [[Last Alliance of Elves and Men]] at the end of the Second Age, the Easterlings were the first enemies to attack Gondor again in {{TA|492}}. They were soundly defeated by King [[Rómendacil I]], but they invaded again in {{TA|541|n}} and took revenge by slaying King Rómendacil. Rómendacil's son [[Turambar (King of Gondor)|Turambar]] took large portions of land from them.

In the next centuries Gondor held sway over the Easterlings. When Gondor's power began to decrease in the twelfth century of the Third Age, the Easterlings took the complete eastern bank of the [[Anduin]] except [[Ithilien]] and crushed Gondor's allies, the Northmen. 

The Easterlings of the Third Age were divided in different tribes, such as the [[Wainriders]] and the [[Balchoth]]. The Wainriders were a confederation of Easterlings who were very active between {{TA|1856}} and {{TA|1944|n}}. They posed a serious threat to Gondor for many years, but were utterly defeated by [[Eärnil II]] in 1944.

When Gondor lost its royal dynasty in {{TA|2050|n}} the Easterlings started to reorganize themselves, and a fierce group called the Balchoth became the most important tribe. In {{TA|2510|n}} they invaded Gondor again and conquered much of [[Calenardhon]], until they were defeated by the [[Éothéod]] who rode to Gondor's aid.

In the War of the Ring, the Easterlings were among the fiercest warriors deployed at the [[Battle of the Pelennor Fields]] by Sauron.

===Northmen===
{{main|Northmen}}
Not all the Men who remained east of the Blue Mountains and Misty Mountains during the First Age were tempted by Morgoth or Sauron, and they were joined after the War of Wrath by those of the Edain who did not wish to travel to Númenor. The [[Northmen]] who dwelt in [[Mirkwood|Greenwood the Great]] and other parts of  [[Rhovanion]] were friendly to the Dúnedain, being for the most part their kin, and many of them became Gondorian subjects. The Men of [[Dale]] and [[Lake-town|Esgaroth]] were Northmen, as were the [[Woodmen|Woodsmen]] of Mirkwood, the tribe of [[skin-changers]] later known as [[Beornings]], and the [[Éothéod]], who became the [[Rohirrim]] or Horse Lords.

===Dunlendings===
When Elendil founded the Kingdom of Arnor, its borders were quickly extended towards the river Greyflood (Sindarin: ''Gwathló''), and Gondor likewise extended up through [[Enedwaith]]. In Enedwaith and [[Minhiriath]] (Sindarin for ''Land between the Rivers'') lived a group of Men related to those Men that became the House of Haleth, and they were known as the [[Dunlendings]]. They had lived in the great woods that covered most of Eriador, and when the Númenóreans started to chop these woods down to build their ships in the [[Second Age]], they earned the hostility of the Dunlendings. The Dunlendings later became bitter enemies of [[Rohan]], as they believed the Rohirrim had stolen their lands.

Because of their enmity with the Rohirrim, the Dunlendings served [[Saruman]] in the War of the Ring and fought against the Horse Lords in the [[Battle of the Hornburg]].

===Drúedain===
{{main|Drúedain}}
Another group of Men were the [[Drúedain]], also called the [[Woses]]. They were small and stooped, and were always few in number and shortlived compared to other races of Men. They lived among the House of Haleth in the First Age, and were held as Edain by the Elves, who called them ''Drúedain'' (from ''Drûg'', their own name for themselves, plus ''Edain''). 

At the end of the Third Age a few Woses still lived in the Drúadan Forest. They held off [[Orcs]] with poisoned arrows and were vital in securing the aid of the Rohirrim in the Battle of the Pelennor Fields. King [[Aragorn|Elessar]] granted the Drúadan Forest to them "forever" in the [[Fourth Age]].

===Hobbits===
{{main|Hobbits}}
[[Hobbits]] were strictly a race of Men rather than a separate species. The origin of Hobbits is obscure; they first appeared in the records of other Men in the middle of the [[Third Age]].

==Etymology==
[[J.R.R. Tolkien|Tolkien]] employed a peculiar usage of the words ''Man'' and ''Mannish'': these terms came to replace the word "human" found in drafts of ''[[The Lord of the Rings]]''.<ref>{{PM|Languages}}, p. 61</ref> It has been suggested that Tolkien might have preferred ''Man'' and ''Mannish'' being pure Germanic roots, unlike the Latin-influenced ''Human'' (cf. ''[[Wiktionary:homo#Latin|homo]]'').<ref>{{HM|RW}}, pp. 156-8</ref> This usage also reflects old Germanic practice, where ''Man'' originally meant ''mankind'', not merely the male gender; this was found (and in many of them, still is found) in all the Germanic languages (i.e. German ''Menschen'', "people").<ref>http://etymonline.com/index.php?term=man&allowed_in_frame=0</ref>

==Other names==
The Elves called the race of '''Mankind''' with poetic names that refer to their later coming, and their mortality. They are mostly called '''''[[Atani]]''''' in [[Quenya]], literally meaning "Second ones" (the [[Elves]] being the First), but also '''''[[Hildor]]''''' ("Followers" or "Aftercomers"), '''''Apanónar''''' ("Afterborn"), '''Secondborn''', '''Younger Children of Ilúvatar''', '''Strangers''' and '''Usurpers'''<ref name="men">{{S|Men}}</ref> because they [[Dominion of Men|dominated Arda]] after the Elves. [[Sindarin]] names were '''''Ephedyn''''' or '''''Aphadrim''''' ("Followers").<ref>{{WJ|Quendi}}</ref>

The name ''Atani'' is cognate with [[Sindarin]] '''[[Adan|Edain]]''', but the latter term was later applied not to the race, but only to the peoples of [[Beleriand]] who aided the Elves in their war with [[Morgoth]] in the [[First Age]].

Other names were '''''Fírimar''''' ([[Quenya|Q.]] [[Mortals]]),<ref name="men">{{S|Men}}</ref><ref>{{PE|17}}, p. 70</ref> '''''Engwar''''' ([[Quenya|Q.]] "The Sickly"), used to describe the mortality of men<ref name="men" /> the '''Self-cursed''' and the '''Guests'''<ref name="men" /> because their fate was outside Arda.

Other names by the Elves, apparently referring to their differences from themselves are '''Inscrutable''', the '''Heavy-handed''', the '''Night-fearers''', and the '''Children of the Sun'''<ref name="men" /> because they awoke with the Sun. 

Hobbits called them the '''Big People''' or the '''[[Big Folk]]''', especially in [[Bree]].<ref>{{FR|I9}}</ref>

{{references}}
[[Category:Incarnates]]
[[Category:Men]]
[[Category:Races]]
[[de:Menschen]]
[[fr:encyclo/peuples/hommes/hommes]]
[[fi:Ihmiset]]