{{short description|3rd King of Gondor}}
{{infobox character
| people=[[Númenóreans|Númenórean]]
| name=Meneldil
| image=Matěj Čadil - Meneldil of Gondor.jpg
| caption="Meneldil of Gondor" by [[Matěj Čadil]]
| pronun=
| othernames=
| titles=[[King of Gondor]]
| position=
| location=[[Gondor]]
| affiliation=[[Last Alliance of Elves and Men]]
| language=[[Sindarin]]
| birth={{SA|3318}}
| birthlocation=[[Rómenna]], [[Númenor]]
| rule={{TA|2}} - {{TA|158}} (156 years)
| death={{TA|158}}
| deathlocation=[[Gondor]]
| age=281
| notablefor=
| house=[[House of Anárion]]
| parentage=[[Anárion]]
| siblings=three unnamed siblings
| spouse=
| children=[[Cemendur (King of Gondor)|Cemendur]]
| gender=Male
| height=
| hair=
| eyes=
| clothing=
| weapons=
| steed=
}}
'''Meneldil''' ({{SA|3318}}<ref name="Elendil">{{PM|Elendil}}</ref> – {{TA|158}},<ref name="TA">{{App|TA}}</ref> aged 281 years), the son of [[Anárion]] and grandson of [[High King of the Dúnedain|High King]] [[Elendil]], was the third [[King of Gondor]] and the first to rule in his own name. He reigned 156 years, from {{TA| 2}} until his death.

==History==
===Early life===
Meneldil was the last man born in [[Númenor]]<ref name="Gladden">{{UT|Gladden}}</ref> and was about one year old at the time of the [[Downfall of Númenor|Downfall]]. He would have been carried to [[Middle-earth]] in his father's ship where [[Isildur]] and [[Anárion]] established a new realm, [[Gondor]], under their joint leadership.

Meneldil was 111 years old when in {{SA|3429}} [[Sauron]] sent his army to [[First Fall of Minas Ithil|attack and capture]] [[Minas Ithil]]. It is not known what role Meneldil may have played while his father defended [[Osgiliath]] and held the hosts of [[Mordor]] at bay. With the arrival of Elendil and [[Gil-galad]]'s forces, the fortunes of the [[War of the Last Alliance]] turned, but in the hard fighting Anárion died (in {{SA|3440}}), as did Elendil (in {{SA|3441}}).<ref name="SA">{{App|SA}}</ref>

===Succession to Kingship===
With the deaths of Elendil and Anárion, [[Arnor]] had no leader and the joint rule in [[Gondor]] was ended. [[Isildur]] returned to Gondor, assumed the [[Elendilmir]] as Arnor's king and proclaimed his [[High King of the Dúnedain|lordship]] over all the [[Dúnedain]], [[Dúnedain of the North|North]] and [[Dúnedain of the South|South]]. While most of Arnor's forces returned to [[Eriador]] the new King remained in the South to restore order and define Gondor's boundaries. With Meneldil and a company of trusted friends, Isildur rode about the boundaries of Gondor and in Anórien created the [[Tomb of Elendil]] upon the hill of [[Eilenaer]], thereafter called [[Amon Anwar]].<ref>{{UT|Cirion}}</ref> 

When he was ready, he committed the rule of Gondor to Meneldil and departed for [[Rivendell|Imladris]] with his three oldest sons to consult with [[Elrond]].<ref name="TA"/><ref name="Gladden"/> It is said that Meneldil was quite pleased to see his uncle and his sons leave for the North, hoping that they would remain there long.<ref>{{UT| Gladden}}, Note 10</ref> Then, a month after their departure, Isildur and his three sons were slain in the [[Disaster of the Gladden Fields]].<ref name="Gladden"/> Arnor would eventually (in {{TA|10}}<ref name="TA"/>) be ruled by Isildur's fourth son, [[Valandil (King of Arnor)|Valandil]], but in the South Meneldil assumed full kingship, which was inherited by his descendants. Gondor would not be ruled by an heir of Isildur until the ascension of [[Aragorn]].

Not much is known about his reign other than that a Gondorian scholar wrote the ''[[Ondonóre Nómesseron Minaþurie]]''.<ref>{{VT|42}}, "[[The Rivers and Beacon-Hills of Gondor]]"</ref>

He was succeeded by his son [[Cemendur (King of Gondor)|Cemendur]].

==Etymology==
''Meneldil'' is [[Quenya]] for "Astronomer".<ref>{{L|297|118}}, p. 386</ref> As Paul Strack explains, it literally means "Lover of the Heavens", being a compound of ''[[menel]]'' ("the heavens") and ''[[-ndil|-(n)dil]]'' ("lover", "friend").<ref>{{webcite|author=Paul Strack|articleurl=http://www.eldamo.org/content/words/word-1337745881.html|articlename=Q. ''Meneldil'' m.|website=Eldamo|accessed=29 October 2021}}</ref>

== Genealogy ==
{{familytree/start}}
{{familytree | | | | ELE | | | | | |ELE=[[Elendil]]<br/><small>''{{SA|3119}} - {{SA|3441|n}}''†</small>}}
{{familytree | |,|-|-|^|-|-|.| | | |}}
{{familytree | ISI | | | | ANA | | |ISI=[[Isildur]]<br/><small>''{{SA|3209}} - {{TA|2}}''†</small>|ANA=[[Anárion]]<br/><small>''{{SA|3219}} - {{SA|3440|n}}''†</small>}}
{{familytree | |!| | | |,|-|^|-|.| |}}
{{familytree | ARN | | UNN | | MEN |ARN=[[Kings of Arnor|''Kings of<br/>Arnor'']]|UNN=''Three children''<br/><small>''unknown''</small>|MEN='''MENELDIL'''<br/><small>''{{SA|3318}} - {{TA|158}}''</small>}}
{{familytree | | | | | | | | | |!| |}}
{{familytree | | | | | | | | | CEM |CEM=[[Cemendur (King of Gondor)|Cemendur]]<br/><small>''{{SA|3399}} - {{TA|238}}''</small>}}
{{familytree | | | | | | | | | |!| |}}
{{familytree | | | | | | | | | EAR |EAR=[[Eärendil (King of Gondor)|Eärendil]]<br/><small>''{{TA|48}} - {{TA|324|n}}''</small>}}
{{familytree/end}}

== Other versions of the legendarium ==
In ''[[The Peoples of Middle-earth]]'', in Section VII "[[The Heirs of Elendil]]", [[Christopher Tolkien]] explained that there were three manuscripts in the textual history of this section. Manuscript A contained the information about the Southern Line of Gondor, and from its condition it appeared to be the first stage of composition. Manuscript B added the Northern Line, and began as a fair copy of A for the Southern line but became heavily emended. Manuscript B led to Manuscript C, a fine copy (but with later emendations), which led to a final typescript D. In the earlier Manuscripts A and B, Meneldil's date of birth was {{SA|3299}} instead of {{SA|3318}}. It was Isildur's son Kiryandil who was born in 3318 and thus was the last man born in Númenor.<ref name="Elendil"/>

{{references}}
{{seq-start}}
{{seq-head
| race=numenorean
| house=[[House of Anárion]]<small><br/>Cadet branch of the [[House of Elendil]]</small>
| born={{SA|3318}}
| died={{TA|158}}
}}
{{seq
| prev=[[Isildur]]<small><br>(and [[Anárion]])</small>
| list=3rd [[King of Gondor]]
| dates={{TA|2}} – {{TA|158|n}}
| next=[[Cemendur (King of Gondor)|Cemendur]]
}}
{{seq-end}}

{{southernline}}
[[Category:Characters in The Silmarillion]]
[[Category:Gondorians]]
[[Category:House of Anárion]]
[[Category:Númenóreans]]
[[Category:Quenya names]]
[[Category:Rulers of Gondor]]
[[Category:Second Age characters]]
[[Category:Third Age characters]]
[[de:Meneldil]]
[[fr:encyclo/personnages/hommes/3a/dunedain/gondoriens/meneldil]]
[[fi:Meneldil]]