{{mountain
| image = Alan Lee - Mindolluin.jpg
| name=Mindolluin
| location=above [[Minas Tirith]]
| belongs=[[White Mountains]]
| description=
| othernames=
| events=finding of a sapling of the [[White Tree]]
| references=
}}
'''Mindolluin'''<ref>{{TT|Pool}}, p. 684</ref> or '''Mount Mindolluin'''<ref>{{TT|Palantir}}, p. 600</ref> was the easternmost mountain of the [[White Mountains]] ([[Sindarin]] ''Ered Nimrais'').<ref>{{RK|Map}}</ref>

Mindolluin was a high mountain with a snow-capped peak and high glens, which cast deep purple shadows in the morning light.<ref>{{RK|MT}}, p. 751</ref> On the eastern side of the mountain a narrow shoulder joined it with the [[Hill of Guard]]<ref name=MT752>{{RK|MT}}, p. 752</ref> on which the city of [[Minas Tirith]] was built<ref name=N>{{HM|N}}, entry '''Hill of Guard''', p. 772</ref> at the level of the fifth wall of the city.<ref name=MT752/>

At the southern feet of Mount Mindolluin was an ancient steep path , which went up the mountain to a high hallow far above the city where only the [[Kings of Gondor]] were accustomed to go. Standing in this spot one could look over a precipice to the towers of the city of Minas Tirith far below.<ref>{{RK|Steward}}, p. 970</ref>

==History==
Shortly after [[Aragorn]]'s coronation as Elessar, on [[25 June]] {{TA|3019}},<ref>{{App|Chief}}, entry for the year 3019, June 25, p. 1095</ref><ref>{{HM|RC}}, p. 638</ref><ref group=note>[[Wayne Hammond]] and [[Christina Scull]] comment that this is an impossibly short period of time for the tree to blossom "when the month of June entered in" and that either the date of the finding of the sapling of the tree or the date of the blossoming of the tree is incorrect.</ref> [[Gandalf]] took him by the forgotten path to the high hallow where the newly-crowned king could view the vastness of his realm. When he remarked that the [[White Tree of Gondor]] in the [[Court of the Fountain (Minas Tirith)|Court of the Fountain]] was still [[Dead Tree|withered]], Gandalf bade him turn around. Opposite the precipice, on an otherwise barren stony slope, one growing thing could be seen: a sapling of the line of [[Nimloth of Númenor|Nimloth]]. Aragorn removed the tree, brought it to the Citadel and planted it by the fountain in the Court of the Fountain as a sign of rebirth, and for [[Arwen]] to come to [[Gondor]] and be his queen.<ref>{{RK|Steward}}, pp. 970-2</ref>

==Etymology==
''Mindolluin'' is a Sindarin name,<ref name=Eldamo>{{webcite|author=Paul Strack|articleurl=https://www.eldamo.org/content/words/word-1563497385.html|articlename=S. ''Mindolluin'' loc.|website=Eldamo|accessed=30 April 2023}}</ref> which means "Towering blue-head".<ref>{{HM|UI}}, entry ''Mindolluin'', p. 439</ref> [[Paul Strack]] suggests that it is a combination of a shortened form or a root form of ''[[minas]]'' ("tower"), with ''[[dol]]'' ("head") and ''[[luin]]'' ("blue").<ref name=Eldamo/> [[Christopher Tolkien]] mentions that the same stem as in ''minas'' occurs in 'Mindolluin''.<ref>{{S|Appendix}}, entry ''minas''</ref>

==Other versions of the legendarium==
In a draft of ''The Lord of the Rings'', the hill was called ''Tor-dilluin''<ref>{{HM|WR}}, p. 77</ref> in [[Noldorin]]<ref name=Eldamo/> before it was changed to ''Mindolluin''.<ref>{{HM|WR}}, note 18, p. 80</ref>

==Portrayal in adaptations==
'''1982-97: ''[[Middle-earth Role Playing]]'':'''
:Mindolluin stands 10,459 feet tall, towering above the snowline. The High Hallow of Mindolluin is one of the holiest sites in Gondor.<ref>{{ICE|4002}}</ref><ref>{{ICE|2007}}</ref><ref>{{ICE|2021}}</ref>

{{references|group}}
[[Category:Gondor]]
[[Category:Sindarin locations]]
[[Category:White Mountains]]
[[de:Mindolluin]]
[[fi:Mindolluin]]
[[fr:encyclo/geographie/reliefs/montagnes blanches/mindolluin]]