{{Unnamed}}
{{infobox character
| people=[[Men|Man]]
| name=Minstrel of Gondor
| image=The Return of the King (1980 film) - Minstrel of Gondor.png
| caption=The ''[[Minstrels|Minstrel]] of [[Gondor]]'' in ''[[The Return of the King (1980 film)]]''
| pronun=
| othernames=
| titles=
| position=[[Minstrels|Minstrel]]
| location=[[Field of Cormallen]], [[North Ithilien]]
| affiliation=[[Gondor]]
| language=[[Westron]] and one of the [[Elvish|elven-tongues]]
| birth=
| birthlocation=
| rule=
| death=
| deathlocation=
| age=
| notablefor=Composed a lay "[[Frodo of the Nine Fingers|of Frodo of the Nine Fingers and the Ring of Doom]]"
| house=
| parentage=
| siblings=
| spouse=
| children=
| gender=Male
| height=
| hair=
| eyes=
| clothing=
| weapons=
| steed=
}}

{{Quote|Praise them with great praise!|The [[Minstrels|minstrel]] of [[Gondor]] in ''[[The Return of the King]]'', "[[The Field of Cormallen]]"}}

The '''minstrel of Gondor''' was an unnamed [[Men|Man]] of [[Gondor]] who sang an epic lay "of [[Frodo Baggins|Frodo of the Nine Fingers]] and the [[Ring of Doom]]".<ref name="Song">{{RK|Cormallen}}, pp. 951-7</ref>

== History ==
On the [[Field of Cormallen]], after [[Frodo Baggins]] and [[Samwise Gamgee]] find out that the king is none other than [[Strider]], a minstrel of Gondor keels and begs the king for his permission to sing. Before waiting for [[Aragorn|Aragorn's]] leave, the minstrel addressed the [[Gondorians|fair people of Gondor]], the [[Rohirrim|Riders]] of [[Rohan]], the [[Elladan and Elrohir|sons]] of [[Elrond]], the [[Dúnedain]] of the [[Eriador|North]], the [[Legolas|Elf]] and the [[Gimli|Dwarf]], the [[Hobbits|greathearts]] of the [[Shire]], and the rest of the [[Free peoples]] that were present. He then announced that his lay was about the [[Quest of the Ring|quest]] "of [[Frodo Baggins|Frodo of the Nine Fingers]] and the [[Ring of Doom]]".<ref name="Song"/>

To this, [[Samwise Gamgee]] stood up, laughed, and said that all his wishes had just come true. He wept immediately after he said this.<ref name="Song"/>

As the rest of the listeners either laughed or wept, the minstrel's clear voice was said to rise as compared to silver and gold. At that moment, the minstrel began to sing in one of the [[Elvish|elven-tongues]], switching between that and [[Westron]], until the hearts of the listeners overflowed with joy at the sweet words and they were weeping again.<ref name="Song"/>

The minstrel's lay lasted almost that entire day, and he concluded it just as the evening began. After praising the [[Hobbits]], the minstrel of Gondor sat back down.<ref name="Song"/>

== Portrayal in adaptations ==
'''1980: ''[[The Return of the King (1980 film)]]'':'''
:The minstrel of Gondor is here, referred to in the credits as '''The Minstrel''', voiced by [[Glenn Yarbrough]]. In the film, the minstrel has a much larger role than he does in the book. He appears as the film's framing device as entertainment at [[Bilbo Baggins|Bilbo Baggins']] 129th birthday party in [[Rivendell]], and relates the tale of Frodo's quest to destroy Bilbo's old [[One Ring|golden ring]], singing various songs in the process.

'''1981: [[The Lord of the Rings (1981 radio series)|''The Lord of the Rings'' (1981 radio series)]]:'''
:The minstrel of Gondor appears in an identical role to that seen in the book.

{{references}}

{{title}}

[[Category:Characters in The Lord of the Rings]]
[[Category:Gondorians]]
[[Category:Minstrels]]
[[Category:Third Age characters]]