{{disambig-more|Morwen|[[Morwen (disambiguation)]]}}
{{infobox character
| people=[[Gondorians|Gondorian]]
| name=Morwen
| image=
| caption=
| pronun=
| othernames=''Morwen of Lossarnach''
| titles=
| position=
| location=[[Lossarnach]] ([[Gondor]])<br />[[Rohan]]
| affiliation=
| language=
| birth=before {{TA|2926}}<ref>{{App|Mark}}, ''Second Line'', 2905-80 16. ''Thengel'', "in 2943 he wedded Morwen of Lossarnach in Gondor, though she was seventeen years the younger", p. 1069</ref>
| birthlocation=
| rule=
| death=Unknown (aged 41+)<ref>{{App|Mark}}, ''Second Line'', 2905-80 16. ''Thengel'', "Théodwyn, was the fairest, though she came late (2963), the child of his age", p. 1069</ref>
| deathlocation=
| age=
| notablefor=
| house=
| parentage=Unnamed father (descended from some previous [[Prince of Dol Amroth]] or one of his ancestors)<ref name=linear>{{UT|Linear}}, p. 286</ref>
| siblings=
| spouse=[[Thengel]]
| children=[[Théoden]]<br />[[Théodwyn]]<br />Three unnamed daughters
| gender=Female
| height=Tall
| hair=Dark
| eyes=
| clothing=
| weapons=
| steed=
}}
'''Morwen''' '''''Steelsheen''''' was the queen to King [[Thengel]] of [[Rohan]] and the mother of his renowned heir, [[Théoden]].<ref name="Eorl">{{App|Mark}}, ''Second Line'', 2905-80 16. ''Thengel'', p. 1069</ref>

== History ==
Although Morwen dwelt in [[Lossarnach]], she did not belong to the people of that land. Her father was originally from [[Belfalas]], having relocated to Lossarnach for its flowering vales. He was a descendant of a former [[Prince of Dol Amroth]], making him and Morwen kinsfolk of [[Imrahil|Prince Imrahil]].<ref name=linear/> 

In {{TA|2943}}, Morwen married [[Thengel]] of [[Rohan]] in [[Gondor]], though she was seventeen years the younger. While living in [[Gondor]] she bore three children, of whom [[Théoden]], the second, was her only son. Following the death of his father, [[Fengel]], Thengel inherited the [[King of Rohan|Kingship of Rohan]] and returned to Rohan with Morwen. There, she bore him two more daughters.<ref name="Eorl"/> The youngest, [[Théodwyn]], was the fairest<ref name="Eorl"/> and would become the mother of [[Éomer]] and [[Éowyn]]<ref name="Third Line">{{App|Mark}}, ''Third Line'', p. 1070</ref>.

== Description ==
The [[Rohirrim]] bestowed upon Morwen the epithet ''Steelsheen''.<ref name="Third Line"/>

As one of the [[Dúnedain of the South]] with high [[Númenórean]] lineage, Morwen passed on traits of stature<ref name=linear/> and bearing<ref name="Third Line"/>. Her descendants - particularly Éomer - were said to be considerably taller than most of the [[Rohirrim]], and some inherited her dark hair.<ref name=linear/> Her granddaughter [[Éowyn]], was also slender and tall, and bore the same graceful and proud-bearing manner of [[Gondor]].<ref name="Third Line"/>

== Etymology ==
The name ''Morwen'' has earlier origins in [[J.R.R._Tolkien|Tolkien's]] [[Legendarium]], notably belonging to a prominent member of the [[House of Bëor]] in the [[First Age]]. In [[Sindarin]] it means "Dark Maiden", from the root [[MOR]]- ("black, dark, darkness") + the female suffix ''[[-wen]]'' ("maiden").<ref>{{webcite|author=[[Paul Strack]]|articleurl=https://eldamo.org/content/words/word-1632718649.html|articlename=S. ''Morwen'' f.|website=Eldamo|accessed=08 August 2023}}</ref>

Didier Salamon and David Giraudeau suggest that her epithet ''Steelsheen'' is a modernized form of an Old English name that consists of the elements ''stíle'' ("steel")<ref>{{webcite|website=[http://www.bosworthtoller.com/ Bosworth-Toller Anglo-Saxon Dictionary]|articleurl=https://bosworthtoller.com/028989|articlename=stíle|accessed=30 April 2025}}</ref> and ''scíne'' ("beautiful")<ref>{{webcite|website=[http://www.bosworthtoller.com/ Bosworth-Toller Anglo-Saxon Dictionary]|articleurl=https://bosworthtoller.com/026817|articlename=scíne|accessed=30 April 2025}}</ref><ref>Didier Salamon & David Giraudeau, Le Livre de la Marche, 2006, p. 152</ref>. Mark Fisher alternatively suggests that the epithet could refer to a glint like steel in her eyes, drawing a parallel to her First Age namesake, [[Morwen]], who was given the epithet ''Elfsheen'' because of the light of her glance (and the beauty of her face).<ref>{{webcite|website=[https://www.glyphweb.com/arda/ The Encyclopedia of Arda]|articleurl=https://www.glyphweb.com/arda/s/steelsheen.html|articlename=Steelsheen|accessed=30 April 2025}}</ref>

== Genealogy ==
{{familytree/start}}
{{familytree | AMR | | FOL | | | | |FOL=[[Folcwine]]<br/><small>''{{TA|2830|n}} - {{TA|2903|n}}''</small>|AMR=''Unknown [[Prince of Dol Amroth]]''}}
{{familytree | |:| | | |!| | | | | |}}
{{familytree | |:| | | FEN | | | | |FEN=[[Fengel]]<br/><small>''{{TA|2870|n}} - {{TA|2953|n}}''</small>}}
{{familytree | |:| | | |!| | | | | |}}
{{familytree | MOR |y| THE | | | | |THE=[[Thengel]]<br/><small>''{{TA|2905|n}} - {{TA|2980|n}}''</small>|MOR='''MORWEN'''<br/><small>''b. {{TA|2922|n}}''</small>}}
{{familytree | |,|-|^|-|v|-|-|-|.| |}}
{{familytree | THE | | DAU | | THW |THE=[[Théoden]]<br/><small>''{{TA|2948|n}} - {{TA|3019|n}}''†</small>|DAU=''three daughters''<br/><small>''unknown''</small>|THW=[[Théodwyn]]<br/><small>''{{TA|2963|n}} - {{TA|3002|n}}''</small>}}
{{familytree | |!| | | |,|-|-|-|(| |}}
{{familytree | THE | | EOM | | EOW |THE=[[Théodred]]<br/><small>''{{TA|2978|n}} - {{TA|3019|n}}''†</small>|EOM=[[Éomer]]<br/><small>''{{TA|2991|n}} - {{FoA|63}}''</small>|EOW=[[Éowyn]]<br/><small>''b. {{TA|2995|n}}''</small>}}
{{familytree/end}}

{{references}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:Morwen Steelsheen}}

[[Category:Dúnedain]]
[[Category:Gondorians]]
[[Category:Sindarin names]]
[[Category:Third Age characters]]
[[de:Morwen von Lossarnach]]
[[fr:/encyclo/personnages/hommes/3a/dunedain/gondoriens/morwen_de_lossarnach]]
[[fi:Lossarnachin Morwen]]