{{infobox character
| people=[[Hobbits|Hobbit]]
| name=Mrs. Bunce
| image=Pauline Baynes - Mrs. Bunce and the Lonely Troll.jpeg
| caption=Mrs. Bunce flees from the Lonely Troll - Illustration by [[Pauline Baynes]]
| pronun=
| othernames=
| titles=
| position=
| location=[[Delving]]<ref name="Perry"/>
| affiliation=[[The Shire]]<ref name="Perry"/>
| language=
| birth=
| birthlocation=
| rule=
| death=
| deathlocation=
| age=
| notablefor=
| family=
| parentage=
| siblings=
| spouse=
| children=
| race=[[Men]]
| gender=Female<ref name="Perry"/>
| height=
| hair=
| eyes=
| clothing=
| weapons=
| steed=
}}

'''Mrs. Bunce''' was an old [[Hobbits|Hobbit]] inhabitant of the town of [[Delving]] who appeared in ''[[Perry-the-Winkle]]'', a nursery rhyme<ref name=collectedpoems>{{CP|105}}</ref> by [[Samwise Gamgee]]<ref name=preface>{{AB|Preface}}</ref>.<ref name="Perry">{{AB|Perry}}, pp. 41-4</ref>

In the poem, Mrs. Bunce was "walking the street" in the early morning when she was greeted by the [[Lonely Troll]] who came into town to make a friend. As a consequence, she dropped her umbrella and basket, and "yelled a frightful yell" before running home to hide "beneath her bed". Her yell was heard by [[Pott the Mayor]], who dived underground in fear.<ref name="Perry" />

Later, Mrs. Bunce was among the [[Shire-hobbits]] who travelled to [[Faraway]] in order to demand food from the Lonely Troll. Mrs. Bunce was among four Hobbits who the Troll never wanted to see again.<ref name="Perry" />

==Background==
In the first version of the poem in early [[1928]],<ref name=commentary>{{AB|Comm}}, ''Perry-the-Winkle''</ref> which was entitled ''The Bumpus'', Mrs. Bunce was called '''Mrs. Thomas''' and had the same role as in the latest version. However, in the first version, when the people all line up at the Bumpus's door, Mrs. Thomas is described as being "late and last" with "her bonnet" being askew.<ref name=collectedpoems>{{CP|105}}</ref> No changes to the character occurred in the second version on [[29 March]],<ref name=collectedpoems/> in which Tolkien revised the poem as part<ref name=collectedpoems/> of his ''[[Tales and Songs of Bimble Bay]]'' series. The third version also retained the same details in relation to Mrs. Thomas.<ref name=commentary/>

In early [[1961]],<ref name=collectedpoems/> when Tolkien revised the poem for inclusion within ''[[The Adventures of Tom Bombadil]]'', Mrs. Thomas was given the name Mrs. Bunce and her role was very slightly reduced.<ref name=collectedpoems/>
 
{{references}}

{{Legend}}

{{DEFAULTSORT:Bunce, Mrs.}}

[[Category:Bunce]]
[[Category:Characters in The Adventures of Tom Bombadil]]
[[Category:Hobbits]]
[[Category:Third Age characters]]

[[fi:Rouva Bans]]