{{Adaptation}}
{{Organization infobox
|name = Mystics
|image = The Rings of Power (TV series) - Mystics.png
|caption = The "Mystics" in ''[[:Category:Images from The Rings of Power (TV series)|The Lord of the Rings: The Rings of Power]]'
|pronun = 
|othernames = 
|founded = 
|founder = 
|purpose = To serve the [[Dark Wizard]] and worship [[Sauron|Lord Sauron]]
|members = [[The Dweller]], [[The Ascetic]], [[The Nomad]], and at least five others
|disbanded = 
|notablefor = Seeking [[The Stranger]]
}}
The '''Mystics''', also known as '''Acolytes''', were members of a magic cult that existed deep within [[Rhûn]] far in the east of [[Arda]]. The Mystics were invented by [[Amazon Studios]] for ''[[The Lord of the Rings: The Rings of Power]]'', where they were portrayed by [[Bridie Sisson]], [[Edith Poor]], and [[Kali Kopae]].

==History==
The Mystics was the name for the members of one of the many magic cults that operated deep within Rhûn and worshipped [[Sauron|Lord Sauron]].

During the late [[Second Age]], a group of three Mystics, [[The Dweller]], The Ascetic, and The Nomad, came west into [[Rhovanion]], seeking [[Sauron|their master]] after presumably witnessing the meteor streaking across the sky. Upon discovering the crash site near the [[Norfield Glen]] of the [[Rhovanion Hills]], they found that their target had left with a [[Harfoots|Harfoot caravan]]. As such, the three of them set out in pursuit, stalking the Harfoots across the [[Weedbrook]], the [[Emyn Muil|Undercliffs]], the [[Dead Marshes|Grey Marshes]], the [[Trout Bend]], and the [[Braids]] of the [[Thistledell]].

After reaching the [[Grove]] where the Harfoot caravan had migrated to, they discovered that [[The Stranger]] had already left the day before. Upon being distracted by [[Elanor Brandyfoot]], who attempted to lead them away, and [[Largo Brandyfoot]], who threatened to brain them, the Dweller put out Largo's torch and blew the embers in the direction of the Harfoots' carts, causing them to catch fire.

Eventually, the Mystics caught up to the [[The Stranger|one they believed to be Sauron]] at the [[East Bight]] of the [[Mirkwood|Greenwood]], where they proclaimed him as Sauron and pledged their service to him. They revealed to him that the stars that he sought were known as the [[Hermit's Hat]], being only visible at a specific place far to the east of Rhûn.

When the Stranger began to get out of control, the Dweller blew a spell at him, causing him to fall unconscious. At some point during that time, the Dweller was made aware of four Harfoots that had been following the Stranger, hoping to rescue him. In order to draw the Harfoots into a trap, the Dweller changed her form to become that of the Stranger. A battle began between the Harfoots, the Mystics, and The Stranger. After the Ascetic murdered [[Sadoc Burrows]] with a knife throw, the Dweller lost her staff and [[Elanor Brandyfoot]] brought it to the Stranger, who banished the three Mystics, revealing himself to be an [[Order of Wizards|Istar]] rather than Sauron.

Soon afterward, the Stranger departed the [[Grove]] for [[Rhûn]] accompanied by [[Elanor Brandyfoot]], in order to find out more about the Mystics and the Hermit's Hat.

==External links==
* [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zuQDiUXx1qE Deadline’s Inside The Ring Episode 8 | The Lord of the Rings: The Rings of Power | Prime Video] (in which The Mystics are revealed as a magic cult)

[[Category:Concepts from adaptations]]