{{mythlore
|title=Mythlore 35
| image = Mythlore 35.png
|editor=[[Glen GoodKnight]]
|publisher=[[Mythopoeic Society]]
|date=Spring [[1983]]
|format=Paperback
|pages=55
}}
'''''Mythlore'' 35''' ([https://dc.swosu.edu/mythlore/vol10/iss1/ Volume 10, Issue 1]) is an issue of the ''[[Mythlore]]'' journal, published by the [[Mythopoeic Society]].

==Contents==

====Articles ====

* Patterson, Nancy-Lou. “Bright-Eyed Beauty: Celtic Elements in Charles Williams, J.R.R. Tolkien, and C.S. Lewis.”
* Woods, Richard. “The Figure of Taliesin in Charles Williams' Arthuriad.”
* Schmiel, Mary Aileen.  “In The Forge of Los: Tolkien and the Art of Creative Fantasy.”
* Kondratiev, Alexi. “New Myths for Old: The Legacy of Iolo Morgannwg and Hersard de le Villemarque.”
* Swycaffer, Jefferson P.  “Historical Motivations for the Siege of Minas Tirith.”

==== Poetry ====

* Pearson, Jean.  “Mortlake.”
* Kenney, Alice P.  “The Dark Girl's Answer.”

==== Features ====

* GoodKnight, Glen H.  Editor's Opening.
* Christopher, Joe R.  An Inklings' Bibliography (24)
* Hyde, Paul Nolan.  “Quenti Lambardillion: A Column on Middle-earth Linguistics.”
* Speth, Lee.  “Cavalier Treatment: A Column.”
* Ellwood, Gracia Fay.  “Matters of Grave Import: A Column.”
* Letters.

==== Reviews ====

* ''The Shores of Middle-earth.'' Robert Giddings and Elizabeth Holland. Reviewed by Nils Ivar Agøy.
* ''SEVEN (March, 1982), Volume 3''. Dr. Barbara Reynolds, Dr. Clyde S. Kilby, and Dr. Beatrice Batson. Reviewed by Nancy-Lou Patterson.
* ''THE DARK CRYSTAL''. Directed by Jim Henson and Frank Oz. Screenplay by David Odell. Story by Jim Henson. Conceptual Designer, Brian Froud. Reviewed by Benjamin Urrutia.
* ''The World of the Dark Crystal.'' Illustrated by Brian Froud. Text by J.J. Llewellyn. Designed and Edited by Rupert Brown. Reviewed by Benjamin Urrutia.
* ''The Tale of the Dark Crystal''. Text by Donna Bass. Illustrated by Bruce McNally. Reviewed by Benjamin Urrutia.
* ''The Dark Crystal.'' Novelization by A.C.H. Smith. Reviewed by Benjamin Urrutia.
* ''Dragonslayer''. Hal Barwoods and Matthew Robbins. Reviewed by Jessica Yates.
* ''C.S. Lewis: Mere Christian.'' Kathryn Lirdskoog. Reviewed by Nancy-Lou Patterson.
* ''A Day in Narnia''. Paul Ford. Reviewed by Nancy-Lou Patterson.
{{mythlorenav|34|36}}
{{title|journal}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:Mythlore 035}}

[[Category:Mythlore]]