{{mythlore
|title=''Mythlore'' 99/100, Volume 26, Issue 1/2
| image = Mythlore 99-100.jpg
|editor=[[Janet Brennan Croft]]
|publisher=[[Mythopoeic Society]]
|date=Fall/Winter [[2007]]
|format=Paperback
|pages=218
}}
'''''Mythlore'' 99/100''' ([https://dc.swosu.edu/mythlore/vol26/iss1/ Volume 26, Issue 1/2]) is an issue of the ''[[Mythlore]]'' journal, published by the [[Mythopoeic Society]].

==Contents ==

==== Articles ====

* Huttar, Charles A. "'Deep Lies the Sea-Longing': Inklings of Home."
* Glyer, Diana Pavlac. "The Centre of the Inklings: Lewis? Williams? Barfield? Tolkien?"
* Campbell, Ethan, and Robert Jackson. "'Good, Not Safe': Structure vs. Chaos in Narnia and the Writing Workshop."
* Seddon, Eric. "''Letters to Malcolm'' and the Trouble with Narnia: C.S. Lewis, J.R.R. Tolkien, and Their 1949 Crisis."
* Nikakis, Karen Simpson. "Sacral Kingship: Aragorn as the Rightful and Sacrificial King in ''The Lord of the Rings''."
* Sabo, Deborah. "Archaeology and the Sense of History in J.R.R. Tolkien's Middle-Earth."
* Birns, Nicholas. "The Enigma of Radagast: Revision, Melodrama, and Depth."
* Berman, Ruth. "Tolkien as a Child of ''The Green Fairy Book''."
* Head, Hayden. "Imitative Desire in Tolkien's Mythology: A Girardian Perspective."
* Bruce, Alexander M. "Maldon and Moria: On Byrhtnoth, Gandalf, and Heroism in ''The Lord of the Rings''."
* Smith, Melissa. "At Home and Abroad: Éowyn's Two-fold Figuring as War Bride in ''The Lord of the Rings''."
* Christopher, Joe R. "Pagan Beliefs in ''The Serpent's Tooth''."
* McInnis, Gilbert. "Nazis, Mythology, and Totalitarian Minds in Kurt Vonnegut's ''Mother Night''."

==== Features ====

* Croft, Janet Brennan. Editorial.

==== Reviews ====

* ''Milton, Spenser, and the Chronicles of Narnia: Literary Sources for C.S. Lewis's Novels.'' Elizabeth Baird Hardy. Reviewed by Charles A. Huttar.
* ''C.S. Lewis: Life, Works, and Legacy.'' Edited by Bruce L. Edwards. Reviewed by Jason Fisher.
* ''The Company They Keep: C.S. Lewis and J.R.R. Tolkien as Writers in Community.'' Diana Pavlac Glyer. Reviewed by Andrew Lazo.
* ''Roots and Branches: Selected Papers on Tolkien.'' Tom Shippey. Reviewed by Jason Fisher.
{{mythlorenav|97/98|101/102}}
{{title|journal}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:Mythlore 099/100}}

[[Category:Mythlore]]