{{mythlore
|title=Mythlore 17
| image = Mythlore_17.gif
|editor=[[Glen GoodKnight]]
|publisher=[[Mythopoeic Society]]
|date=May [[1978]]
|format=Paperback
|pages=47
}}

'''''Mythlore'' 17''' ([https://dc.swosu.edu/mythlore/vol5/iss1/ Volume 5, Issue 1]) is an issue of the ''[[Mythlore]]'' journal, published by the [[Mythopoeic Society]].

==Contents ==

====Articles====

* Walker, Steven L. "The War of the Rings Treelogy: An Elegy for Lost Innocence and Wonder." 3-5.
* Howard, Thomas. "Charles Williams' Use of Arthurian Materials." 6-10.
* Rosenberg, Jerome. "The Humanity of Sam Gamgee." 10-11.
* Carter, Margaret L. "A Note on Moral Concepts in Lewis' Fiction." 35.
* Christopher, Joe R. "Trying to Capture 'White Magic.'" 36-37.
* Nelson, Marie. "Non-Human Speech in the Fantasy of C.S. Lewis, J.R.R. Tolkien, and Richard Adams." 37-39.

====Features====

* Letters. 12+.
* GoodKnight, Glen H. Editorial: "Going On In the Great Dance." 25+.
* Patterson, Nancy-Lou. "One Great Flower of Silver." Review of ''The Silmarillion'' by J.R.R. Tolkien. 27.
* Patterson, Nancy-Lou. "Plums and Biscuits." Review of ''C.S. Lewis: An Annotated Checklist of Writings About Him and His Works'' by Joe R. Christopher and Joan K. Ostling. 29.
* Patterson, Nancy-Lou. "Toward Pearl-Dust Shores." Review of ''A Speculation on the Silmarillion'' by Jim Allan. 29-30.
* Christopher, Joe R. "Let Us Go a-Carrolling." Review of ''Lewis Carroll Observed'', edited by Edward Guiliano; ''The Rectory Magazine'', edited by Lewis Carroll; ''Lewis Carroll as I Knew Him'' by Isa Bowman. 29-30.
* Some Tolkien Art. 31.
* Comments on Some Photographs. 32+.
* Christopher, Joe R. "An Inklings Bibliography (6)." 40-46.
* ''Mythprint''. 47.

====Poetry====

* Paxson, Diana L. "The Baby and the Bird." 23+.
* Boenig, Robert. "Bors Returning." 26.

====Art====

* Bonnie GoodKnight: cover, 2, 11; Photographs
* Thadara Ottobris: 6, 7, 8, 9
* Sarah Beach: 12, 13, 18, 19
* Mark Badger: 15, 18
* Tim Kirk: 27, 47
* R. Patrick McCabe: 28
* Robin McCabe: back cover
* Peter Thorpe: 37
* Cover: Bonnie GoodKnight, "Mandos giving the Doom of the Noldor from ''The Silmarillion''."
* Back Cover: Robin McCabe, "Earendil on the ship Vingilot."
* Page 17: Michael Logan, "Theoden."
* Page 21: Elzabeth Best, "Flight to the Ford."
* Page 24: Mark Badger, "Jill Eustace, and Puddleglum crossing the Giant's Bridge."
{{mythlorenav|16|18}}
{{title|journal}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:Mythlore 017}}

[[Category:Mythlore]]