{{mythlore
|title=''Mythlore'' 109/110, Volume 28, Issue 3/4
| image = Mythlore 109 110.gif
|editor=[[Janet Brennan Croft]]
|publisher=[[Mythopoeic Society]]
|date=Spring/Summer [[2010]]
|format=Paperback
|pages=208
}}
'''''Mythlore'' 109/110''' ([https://dc.swosu.edu/mythlore/vol28/iss3/ Volume 28, Issue 3/4]) is an issue of the ''[[Mythlore]]'' journal, published by the [[Mythopoeic Society]].

==Contents==

====Articles====

* Nelson, Marie. "J.R.R. Tolkien's 'Leaf by Niggle': An Allegory in Transformation."
* Bilbro, Jeffrey. "Phantastical Regress: The Return of Desire and Deed in ''Phantastes'' and ''The Pilgrim's Regress''."
* Oziewicz, Marek, and Daniel Hade. "The Marriage of Heaven and Hell? Philip Pullman, C.S. Lewis, and the Fantasy Tradition."
* Christopher, Joe R. "C.S. Lewis's 'The Meteorite' and the Importance of Context."
* Martínez, Helios De Rosario. "''Fairy'' and ''Elves'' in Tolkien and Traditional Literature."
* Brackmann, Rebecca. "'Dwarves are Not Heroes': Antisemitism and the Dwarves in J.R.R. Tolkien's Writing."
* Riga, Frank P. "Rethinking Shylock's Tragedy: Radford's Critique of Anti-Semitism in ''The Merchant of Venice''."
* Kisor, Yvette. "Totemic Reflexes in Tolkien's Middle-earth."
* Ruud, Jay. "The Voice of Saruman: Wizards and Rhetoric in ''The Two Towers''."
* Waito, David M. "The Shire Quest: The 'Scouring of the Shire' as the Narrative and Thematic Focus of ''The Lord of the Rings''."

====Features==== 

*Croft, Janet Brennan. Editorial.

====Reviews ====

* ''Where the Shadows Lie: A Jungian Interpretation of Tolkien's The Lord of the Rings.'' Pia Skogemann. Reviewed by Edith L. Crowe.
* ''Finding Oz: How L. Frank Baum Discovered the Great American Story.'' Evan I. Schwartz. Reviewed by Richard Tuerk.
* ''Out of My Bone: The Letters of Joy Davidman.'' Ed. Don W. King. Reviewed by Joe R. Christopher.
* ''Collected Poems.'' Mervyn Peake, edited with an introduction by R.W. Maslen. Reviewed by David Bratman.
* ''C.S. Lewis on the Final Frontier: Science and the Supernatural in the Space Trilogy.'' Sanford Schwartz. Reviewed by Joe R. Christopher.
* ''Death and Fantasy: Essays on Philip Pullman, C.S. Lewis, George MacDonald, And R.L. Stevenson.'' William Gray. Reviewed by David D. Oberhelman.
* ''Stephen R. Donaldson and the Modern Epic Vision.'' Christine Barkley; Series editors Donald E. Palumbo and C. W. Sullivan III. Jefferson. Reviewed by Kim Coleman Healy.
* ''The Fantastic Horizon: Essays and Reviews.'' Darrell Schweitzer. Reviewed by David Bratman.
{{mythlorenav|107/108|111/112}}
{{title|journal}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:Mythlore 109/110}}

[[Category:Mythlore]]