{{mythlore
|title=''Mythlore'' 97/98, Volume 25, Issue 3/4
| image = Mythlore 97 98.gif
|editor=[[Janet Brennan Croft]]
|publisher=[[Mythopoeic Society]]
|date=Spring/Summer [[2007]]
|format= Paperback
|pages=196
}}
'''''Mythlore'' 97/98''' ([https://dc.swosu.edu/mythlore/vol25/iss3/ Volume 25, Issue 3/4]) is an issue of the ''[[Mythlore]]'' journal, published by the [[Mythopoeic Society]].

== Contents==

====Articles ====

* Searle, Alison. "Fantastical Fact, Home, or Other? The Imagined 'Medieval' in C.S. Lewis."
* Donnelly, Colleen. "Feudal Values, Vassalage, and Fealty in ''The Lord of the Rings''."
* Fredrick, Candice, and Sam McBride. "Battling the Woman Warrior: Females and Combat in Tolkien and Lewis."
* Hatcher, Melissa McCrory. "Finding Woman's Role in ''The Lord of the Rings.''"
* Hall, R.D. "Through a Dark Lens: Jackson's ''Lord of the Rings'' as Abject Horror."
* Harl, Allison. "The Monstrosity of the Gaze: Critical Problems with a Film Adaptation of ''The Lord of the Rings''."
* Carter, Susan. "Galadriel and Morgan le Fey: Tolkien's Redemption of the Lady of the Lacuna."
* Lakowski, Romuald Ian. "The Fall and Repentance of Galadriel."
* Boenig, Robert. "''Prince Caspian'' and ''Child Christopher and Goldilind the Fair''."
* Gray, William. "Pullman, Lewis, MacDonald, and the Anxiety of Influence."
* Peretti, Daniel. "The Ogre Blinded and ''The Lord of the Rings''."
* Lewis, Paul W. "Beorn and Tom Bombadil: A Tale of Two Heroes."
* Starr, Charlie W. "Meaning, Meanings, and Epistemology in C.S. Lewis."

====Features====

*Croft, Janet Brennan. Editorial.

==== Reviews ====

* ''The J.R.R. Tolkien Companion and Guide.'' Christina Scull and Wayne G. Hammond. Reviewed by David D. Oberhelman.
* ''The Lord of the Rings and Philosophy: One Book to Rule Them All.'' Edited by Gregory Bassham and Eric Bronson. Reviewed by Clark Hutton.
{{mythlorenav|95/96|99/100}}
{{title|journal}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:Mythlore 097/098}}

[[Category:Mythlore]]