{{mythlore
|title=Mythlore 22
| image = Mythlore 22.gif
|editor=Gracia Fay Ellwood
|publisher=[[Mythopoeic Society]]
|date=Fall [[1979]]
|format=Paperback
|pages=47
}}
'''''Mythlore'' 22''' ([https://dc.swosu.edu/mythlore/vol6/iss4/ Volume 6, Issue 4]) is an issue of the ''[[Mythlore]]'' journal, published by the [[Mythopoeic Society]].

==Contents==

====Articles====

* Purtill, Richard L. “Heaven and Other Perilous Realms.” 3-6.
* Russell, Mariann. “Elements of the Idea of the City in Charles Williams’ Arthurian Poetry.” 10-18.
* Patterson, Nancy-Lou. “''Guardaci Ben'': The Visionary Woman in C.S. Lewis’ Chronicles of Narnia and That Hideous Strength (Part 2).” 20-24.
* Berman, Ruth. “A Note on the Mythopoeeic Holdings in the Kerlan Collection.” 32, 42.
* Epperson, William R. “The Repose of a Very Delicate Balance: Postulants and Celebrants of the Sacrament of Marriage in the Detective Fiction of Dorthy L. Sayers.” 33-36.

====Features====

* Speth, Lee. “Cavalier Treatment: The Pig in the Widow’s Shawl.” Rev. of Brooks, Walter R. The Freddy the Pig series. 7-8.
* GoodKnight, Glen. “Founder’s Focus.” 17+.
* Ellwood, Gracia Fay. Editorial: “Of Creation and Love.” 19, 42.
* Patterson, Nancy-Lou. “Renaissance Women.” Rev. of Hannay, Margaret P., ed. As Her Whimsey Took Her: Critical Essays on the Work of Dorothy L. Sayers. 25.
* Kocher, Paul H. “Jung in Middle Earth.” Rev. of O’Neill, Timothy.  The Individuated Hobbit: Jung, Tolkien, and the Archetypes of Middle-earth. 25.
* Milward, Peter. “Perchance to Touch: Tolkien as Scholar.” 31-32.
* Cowan, Lisa Ellen. “Mythalliances.” 37+.
* Letters. 39+.
* Christopher, Joe R. “An Inklings Bibliography (11).” 44-47.

====Reviews====

* Patterson, Nancy-Lou. “The Geography of the Spirit.” Rev. of Sammons, Martha C. A Guide Through Narnia. 26.
* Patterson, Nancy-Lou. “Sayers in Silver.” Rev. of Hone, Ralph E.  Dorothy Sayers: A Literary Biography. 26-27.
* Patterson, Nancy-Lou. “Nuggets by Niggle.” Rev. of Becker, Alida, ed. The Tolkien Scrapbook. 27-28.
* Patterson, Nancy-Lou. “Acceptance of the Wonderful.” Rev. of Como, James T., ed. C.S. Lewis at the Breakfast Table, and Other Reminiscences. 28-29.
* Ellwood, Robert S., Jr. “Three on the Little People.” Rev. of Briggs, Katharine. An Encyclopedia of Fairies. Briggs, Katharine. The Vanishing People. Phillpotts, Beatrice. The Book of Fairies. 29-30.
* Patterson, Nancy-Lou. “Further up and Further In.” Rev. of Walsh, Chad. The Literary Legacy of C.S. Lewis. 30.

====Art====

* Lisa Cowan: 28
* Stephen P. Gaddis: 9, 43
* Bonnie GoodKnight: 40
* Annette Harper: cover, 34, 35, 36, back cover
* Mary Janis Johnson: 12, 15
* Thadara Ottobris: 6, 21
* John Pivovarnick: 5
* Gord Wilson: 47
* Cover: Annette Harper, “Legolas.”
* Page 5: John Pivovarnick, “Smead Morgul.”
* Page 9: Stephen P. Gaddis, “The Scryer’s Portal.”
* Page 43: Stephen P. Gaddis, “Mythcon XI.”
{{mythlorenav|21|23}}
{{title|journal}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:Mythlore 022}}

[[Category:Mythlore]]