{{mythlore
|title=Mythlore 19
| image = Mythlore_19.gif
|editor=Gracia Fay Ellwood
|publisher=[[Mythopoeic Society]]
|date=Winter [[1979]]
|format=Paperback
|pages=47
}}

'''''Mythlore'' 19''' ([https://dc.swosu.edu/mythlore/vol6/iss1/ Volume 6, Issue 1]) is an issue of the ''[[Mythlore]]'' journal, published by the [[Mythopoeic Society]].

==Contents==
====Articles====
* McGillis, Roderick F. “George Macdonald and the Lilith Legend in the Nineteenth Century.” 3-11.
* Bisenicks, Dainis. “Children, Magic, and Choices.” 13-16.
* Lee, George. “And the Darkness Grasped It Not: The Struggle of Good and Evil in Charles Williams.” 18-20.
* Thorson, Stephen. “A Brief Introduction to the History and Origin of the Holy Grail Motif.” 23-24.
* Christopher, Joe R. “Sir Gawain’s Missing Day.” 39-41.
* Lindskoog, Kathryn. “Getting It Together: Lewis and the Two Hemispheres of Knowing.” 43-45.

====Features====

* Speth, Lee. Cavalier Treatment: “A Quest for a King.” Review of ''The King of Alsander'' by James Elroy Flecker. 17.
* Letters. 25.
* Colvin, George. “Miscellany.” Review of “Forgotten Fantasy” series from Newcastle Publishing; Fantasy and SF criticism series from Borgo Press; ''Land of Heroes: A Retelling of the Kalevala'' by Ursula Synge; ''Quag Kep'' by Andre Norton; ''A Field Guide to the Little People'' by Nancy Arrowsmith and George Moore; ''Cloudy With a Chance of Meatballs'' by Judy Barrett. 30.
* Christopher, Joe R. “Sayers and Ousby on Wilkie Collins.” Review of ''Wilkie Collins: A Critical and Biographical Study'' by Dorothy L. Sayers; ''Bloodhounds of Heaven: The Detective in English Fiction from Godwin to Doyle'' by Ian Ousby. 31-32.
* Patterson, Nancy-Lou. “How Thin Is the Crust.” Review of ''The Dark Tower and Other Stories'' by C.S. Lewis. 32-33.
* Patterson, Nancy-Lou. “Themes, Places, Beings, Things.” Review of ''The Mythology of Middle-earth'' by Ruth S. Noel. 33-35.
* Ellwood, Robert S., Jr. “Of Pictures and Words.” Review of ''Faeries'' by Brian Froud and Alan Lee; ''Eschatus'' by Bruce Pennington. 35.
* Walker, Steven C. “Tolkien According to Bakshi.” Review of ''The Lord of the Rings'', directed by Ralph Bakshi. 36.
* Ziegler, Dale. “Ring-Wrath: Or Therein Bakshi Again.” Review of ''The Lord of the Rings'', directed by Ralph Bakshi. 37-38.
* Ellwood, Gracia Fay. Editorial. 38.
* Christopher, Joe R. “An Inklings Bibliography (8).” 46-47.

====Poetry====

* Christopher, Joe R. “Eowyn.” 20.
* Christopher, Joe R. “The Piping Song.” 22.
* Christopher, Saralinda. “Unicorns.” 42.

====Art====

* Elizabeth Best: 12, back cover
* Tim Callahan: 25
* Bonnie GoodKnight: 19, 28, 29, 34, 36, 40, 44*, 45
* Annette Harper: 21
* Michael Logan: Calligraphy: 20, 22, 42
* Victoria de Nevyen: 14, 15, 16
* Thadara Ottobris: cover, 4, 5, 8, 9, 47
* Nancy-Lou Patterson: 32
* John Pivovarnick: 11, 33
* Christine Smith: 44*
* Karl Whittenberg: 27
* Cover: Thadara Ottobris, “Lilith.”
* Back Cover: Elizabeth Best, “Minas Morgul.”
* Page 12: Elizabeth Best, “Goldberry.”
* Page ##: Victoria de Nevyen. “Menolly and the Fire Lizards.”
* Page 32: Nancy-Lou Pattersom. “Wedding Island.”
{{mythlorenav|18|20}}
{{title|journal}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:Mythlore 019}}

[[Category:Mythlore]]