{{mythlore
|title=''Mythlore'' 45, Volume 12, Issue 3
| image = Mythlore 45.png
|editor=[[Glen GoodKnight]]
|publisher=[[Mythopoeic Society]]
|date=Spring [[1986]]
|format=Paperback
|pages=63
}}
'''''Mythlore'' 45''' ([https://dc.swosu.edu/mythlore/vol12/iss3/ Volume 12, Issue 3]) is an issue of the ''[[Mythlore]]'' journal, published by the [[Mythopoeic Society]].

[[John D. Rateliff]]'s article "'And Something Yet Remains to Be Said': Tolkien and Williams" (pp.&nbsp;48–54) includes several unpublished texts by [[J.R.R. Tolkien|Tolkien]]: details of a brief annotation Tolkien made to a manuscript of ''[[The Lord of the Rings]]'' after a comment from [[Charles Williams]] (p.&nbsp;52); extract from a letter to Caroline Whitman Everett dated 24 June 1957 regarding Charles Williams (p.&nbsp;53); extract from [[Letter to Mother Mary Anthony|a letter to Mother Mary Anthony dated 12 April 1966]], also regarding Charles Williams (p.&nbsp;53).<ref>[http://www.tolkienbooks.net/php/details.php?reference=65875 Mythlore 45. Spring 1986] at [http://www.tolkienbooks.net/ TolkienBooks.net] (accessed 18 November 2011)</ref>

==Contents==

==== Articles ====

* Schakel, Peter. “Dance as Metaphor and Myth in Lewis, Tolkien, and Williams.”
* Beach, Sarah. “The Masque of the Silmarils [Drama].”
* Bosky, Bernadette. “Grace and Goetia: Magic as Forced Compensation in All Hallows Eve.”
* Musacchio, George. “C.S. Lewis’ A Grief Observed as Fiction.”
* Deyo, Steven M. “Niggle's Leaves: The Red Book of Westmarch and Related Minor Poetry of J.R.R. Tolkien.”
* Farrell, Eleanor M. “‘And Clove the Wind from Unseen Shores’: The Sea Voyage Motif in Imaginative Literature”
* Rateliff, John D. “'And Something Yet Remains to Be Said': Tolkien and Williams.”
* Thompson, George H. “Early Review of Books by J.R.R. Tolkien.”

==== Features ====

* GoodKnight, Glen and Diana Pavlac. Opening Remarks.
* Kondratiev, Alexei.  “Tales Newly Told.”
* Hyde, Paul Nolan. “Quenti Lambardillion.”
* Speth, Lee. “Cavalier Treatment: The Figure of Simon.”
* Letters.

==== Reviews ====

* ''The Lays of Beleriand.'' J.R.R. Tolkien, edited by Christopher Tolkien. Reviewed by Jessica Yates.
* ''The Neverending Story.'' Michael Ende, translated from the German by Ralph Manheim. Reviewed by Thomas M. Egan.
* ''The Magdalen Metaphysicals:'' Idealism and Orthodoxy at Oxford. James Patrick. Reviewed by Nancy-Lou Patterson.
* ''Secret Gardens.'' Humphrey Carpenter. Reviewed by Nancy-Lou Patterson.
* ''VII - An Anglo-American Literary Review. Volume 6.'' Dr. Barbara Reynolds, Dr. Clyde S. Kilby, and Dr. Beatrice Batson. Reviewed by Nancy-Lou Patterson.
{{mythlorenav|44|46}}
{{references}}
{{title|journal}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:Mythlore 045}}

[[Category:Mythlore]]