{{mythlore
|title=Mythlore 5
| image = Mythlore_5.gif
|editor=[[Glen GoodKnight]]
|publisher=[[Mythopoeic Society]]
|date=Winter [[1970]]
|format=Paperback
|pages=23
}}

'''''Mythlore'' 5''' ([https://dc.swosu.edu/mythlore/vol2/iss1/ Volume 2, Issue 1]) is an issue of the ''[[Mythlore]]'' journal, published by the [[Mythopoeic Society]].

== Contents ==

==== Features ====

* GoodKnight, Glen. "The Counsel of Elrond." 2.
* Zuber, Bernie. "Across the Brandywine." 3.
* Kuhl, Rand. "Lore of Logres: In Touch with Joy." Review of "On Fairy-stories" by J.R.R. Tolkien. 11.
* "News of Special Events." 12+.
* Zuber, Bernie. "World of Fanzines." 16+.
* "Missives to Mythlore." 21+.
* Editorial: "Learning from Tolkien." 23+.

==== Fiction ====

* Levy, Michael. "The Griffin." 10.

==== Poetry ====

* Warren, Eugene. "Utter East." 10.

==== Articles ====

* Juhren, Marcella. "The Ecology of Middle Earth." 4-6, 9.
* GoodKnight, Glen. "The Social History of the Inklings: J.R.R. Tolkien, C.S. Lewis, Charles Williams, 1939-1945." 7-9.
* Hannay, Margaret P. "The Mythology of ''Perelandra''." 14-16.
* McKenzie, Sister Elizabeth. "Above All Shadows Rides The Sun." 18.
* Peoples, Galen. "The Great Beast: Imagination in Harness." 19-20.Bernie Zuber: 5, 21, 31, 32, 40

==== Art ====

* George Barr: cover, 20, 22
* Bonnie Bergstrom: 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 13, 18, 22
* Katherine Cribbs: 16
* Tim Kirk: cover, 12, 13, 14, 15, back cover
* Bruce McMenomy: 9
* Bernie Zuber: 10, 17, 19
* Cover: George Barr, The first of Tolkien; Tim Kirk, His creatures
* Back Cover: Tim Kirk, "Jadis showing the children Charn from ''The Magician's Nephew'' by C.S. Lewis"
* Page 12: Wendy Fletcher, "The White Witch from ''The Lion, The Witch, and The Wardrobe'' by C.S. Lewis"
* Page 17: Bernie Zuber, "Rivendell"
{{mythlorenav|4|6}}

{{title|journal}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:Mythlore 005}}
[[Category:Mythlore]]