{{mythlore
|title=Mythlore 16
| image = Mythlore_16.jpeg
|editor=[[Glen GoodKnight]]
|publisher=[[Mythopoeic Society]]
|date=June [[1977]]
|format=Paperback
|pages=47
}}

'''''Mythlore'' 16''' ([https://dc.swosu.edu/mythlore/vol4/iss4/ Volume 4, Issue 4])  is an issue of the ''[[Mythlore]]'' journal, published by the [[Mythopoeic Society]].

==Contents ==

====Articles====

* Chapman, Ed. “Images of the Numinous in T.H. White and C.S. Lewis.” 3-10.
* Reynolds, William. “Poetry as Metaphor in ''The Lord of the Rings.''” 12-16.
* Kobil, Daniel T. “The Elusive Appeal of the Fantastic.” 17-19.
* Berman, Ruth. “Who’s Lleu?” 20-21.

====Features====

* Jones, Susan F. A Conference Report. 10.
* GoodKnight, Glen H. “Wizards — Dismal Warm-up for LotR Film.” Review of ''Wizards'', directed by Ralph Bakshi. 11.
* GoodKnight, Glen H. “Comments on Some Photographs.” 23+.
* Tolkien Conference VI / Mythopoeic Conference VIII. 25.
* Patterson, Nancy-Lou. “Soap and Sunlight.” Review of ''C.S. Lewis: The Shape of His Faith and Thought'' by Paul L. Holmer. 26.
* Colvin, George. “Pointed Fun by Chesterton.” Review of ''The Napoleon of Notting Hill'' by G.K. Chesterton. 26.
* Letters. 28+.
* Christopher, Joe R. “An Inklings Bibliography (5).” 40-46.
* ''Mythprint''. 47.

==== Poetry ====

* Dahl, Michael. “Saving The Appearances.” 19+.
* Ellwood, Robert S., Jr. “The Iconography of Love I and II.” 21+.

====Art====

* Beryl de Folo: 47
* Bonnie GoodKnight: 2, 9, 27; Photgraphs: 23, 24
* Annette Harper: 13, 16, 22, back cover
* Michael Kucharski: 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34
* Bruce McMenomy: cover, 4
* Thadara Ottobris: 26, 35
* John Uhrumacher: 36, 37
* Mike Workman: 39
* Cover: Bruce McMenomy, “The Chronoscope from ''The Dark Tower.''”
{{mythlorenav|15|17}}

{{title|journal}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:Mythlore 016}}

[[Category:Mythlore]]