{{mythlore
|title=''Mythlore'' 124, Volume 32, Issue 2
| image = Mythlore 124.gif
|editor=[[Janet Brennan Croft]]
|publisher=[[Mythopoeic Society]]
|date=Spring/Summer [[2014]]
|format=Paperback
|pages=208
}}
'''''Mythlore'' 124''' ([https://dc.swosu.edu/mythlore/vol32/iss2/ Volume 32, Issue 2]) is an issue of the ''[[Mythlore]]'' journal, published by the [[Mythopoeic Society]].

==Contents==

====Articles ====

* Bunting, Nancy A. "Tolkien in Love: Pictures from Winter 1912-1913."
* Wagner, Erin K. "Divine Surgeons at Work: The Presence and Purpose of the Dream Vision in ''Till We Have Faces''."
* Croft, Janet Brennan. "Tolkien's Faërian Drama: Origins and Valedictions."
* Trebicki, Grzegorz. "Subverting Mythopoeic Fantasy: Miyuki Miyabe's ''The Book of Heroes''."
* Klein, Deborah. "They Have Quarreled with the Trees: Perverted Perceptions of 'Progress' in the Fiction Series of C.S. Lewis."
* Young, Joseph. "Artemis at Ragnarok: E.R. Eddison's Queen Antiope."
* Riga, Frank P., Thum, Maureen, and Kollmann, Judith. "From Children’s Book to Epic Prequel: Peter Jackson’s Transformation of Tolkien’s ''The Hobbit''."
* Long, Josh B. "Pillaging Middle-earth: Self-plagiarism in ''Smith of Wootton Major.''"
* Huttar, Charles A. "The Art of Detection in a World of Change: ''The Silver Chair'' and Spenser Revisited."

====Features====  

*Croft, Janet Brennan. Editorial.

====Reviews====

* ''George MacDonald: Divine Carelessness and Fairytale Levity.'' Daniel Gabelman. Reviewed by Bonnie Gaarden.
* ''The Gender Dance: Ironic Subversion in C.S. Lewis's Cosmic Trilogy.'' Monika B. Hilder. Preface by Matthew Dickerson. Reviewed by Joe R. Christopher.
* ''Sir Gawain and the Green Knight: In a Modern English Version with a Critical Introduction.'' John Gardner. Reviewed by Perry Neil Harrison.
* ''Myths of Light: Eastern Metaphors of the Eternal.'' Joseph Campbell. Reviewed by Christopher Tuthill.
* ''The Riddles of the Hobbit.'' Adam Roberts. Reviewed by Jon Garrad.
* ''The Modern Literary Werewolf: A Critical Study of the Mutable Motif.'' Brent A. Stypczynski. Reviewed by Sharon L. Bolding.
* ''Fairy Tales Reimagined: Essays on New Retellings.'' Ed. by Susan Redington Bobby. Reviewed by Kazia Estrada.
* ''C.S. Lewis's Perelandra: Reshaping the Image of the Cosmos.'' Ed. Judith Wolfe and Brendan Wolfe. Reviewed by Holly Ordway.
* ''The Ideal of Kingship in the Writings of Charles Williams, C.S. Lewis, and J.R.R. Tolkien: Divine Kingship is Reflected in Middle-Earth.'' Christopher Scarf. Reviewed by Melody Green.
* ''The Ring of Words: Tolkien and the Oxford English Dictionary.'' By Peter Gilliver, Jeremy Marshall, and Edmund Weiner. Reviewed by Mike Foster.
* ''Tolkien: The Forest and the City.'' Ed. Helen Conrad-O'Briain and Gerard Hynes. Reviewed by T.S. Miller.
* ''Tolkien Studies X.'' Edited by Michael D.C. Drout, Verlyn Flieger, and David Bratman. Reviewed by Janet Brennan Croft.
* ''Seven: An Anglo-American Literary Review 30.'' Edited by Marjorie Lamp Mead. Reviewed by Janet Brennan Croft.
{{mythlorenav|123|125}}
{{title|journal}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:Mythlore 124}}

[[Category:Mythlore]]