{{mythlore
|title=Mythlore 37
| image = Mythlore 37.png
|editor=[[Glen GoodKnight]]
|publisher=[[Mythopoeic Society]]
|date=Winter [[1984]]
|format=Paperback
|pages=55
}}
'''''Mythlore'' 37''' ([https://dc.swosu.edu/mythlore/vol10/iss3/ Volume 10, Issue 3]) is an issue of the ''[[Mythlore]]'' journal, published by the [[Mythopoeic Society]].

==Contents==

====Articles ====

* Hall, Robert A., Jr. “Silent Commands? Frodo and Gollum at the Cracks of Doom.”
* Stoddard, William. “A Critical Approach to Fantasy with Application to The Lord of the Rings.”
* Callaway, David. “Gollum: A Misunderstood Hero.”
* Bartlett, Sally. “Invasion from Eternity: Time and Myth in Middle-earth.”
* Kocher, Paul H. “The Drúedain.”
* Donahue, Thomas S. “A Linguist Looks at Tolkien's Elvish.”
* Patterson, Nancy-Lou. “Beneath That Ancient Roof: The House as Symbol in Dorothy L. Sayers' Busman's Honeymoon.”
* Walker, R.C. “The Little Kingdom: Some Considerations and a Map.”

==== Poetry ====

* Jurich, Marilyn. “Still Another Definition of Poetry.”

==== Features ====

* GoodKnight, Glen. Editorial.
* Christopher, Joe R. An Inklings' Bibliography (26).
* Beach, Sarah. “Mythopoesis.”
* Letters.

==== Reviews ====

* ''Star Wars, Episode VI: Return of the Jedi.'' Lucasfilm, 20th Century Fox. Reviewed by Benjamin Urrutia.
* ''And God Came In.'' Lyle W. Dorsett. Reviewed by Nancy-Lou Patterson.
* ''Charles Williams, Poet of Theology.'' Glen Cavaliero. Reviewed by Nancy-Lou Patterson.
* ''VII: An Anglo-American Literary Review.'' Vol. 4. Reviewed by Nancy-Lou Patterson.
* ''A Reference Guide.'' Ruth Tanis Youngberg, Dorothy L. Sayers. Reviewed by Nancy-Lou Patterson.
{{mythlorenav|36|38}}

{{title|journal}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:Mythlore 037}}
[[Category:Mythlore]]