{{mythlore
|title=''Mythlore'' 43, Volume 12, Issue 1
| image = Mythlore 43.png
|editor=[[Glen GoodKnight]]
|publisher=[[Mythopoeic Society]]
|date=Autumn [[1985]]
|format=Paperback
|pages=63
}}
'''''Mythlore'' 43''' ([https://dc.swosu.edu/mythlore/vol12/iss1/ Volume 12, Issue 1]) is an issue of the ''[[Mythlore]]'' journal, published by the [[Mythopoeic Society]].
==Contents==

==== Articles ====

* Sammons, Margaret. “Tolkien On Fantasy in Smith of Wootton Major.”
* Yandell, Steven. “The Trans-cosmic Journeys in The Chronicles of Narnia.”
* Rawls, Melanie. “Arwen, Shadow Bride.”
* Egan, Thomas. “Tolkien and Chesterton: Some Analogies.”
* Kocher, Paul. “Ilúvatar and The Secret Fire.”
* Ryan, J. S. “Saruman, ‘Sharkey,’ and Suruman: Analogous Figures of Eastern Ingenuity and Cunning.”
* Patterson, Nancy-Lou. “Letters From Hell: The Symbolism of Evil in The Screwtape Letters.”
* Thompson, George H. “Early Review of Books by J.R.R. Tolkien: Part III.”

==== Features ====

* GoodKnight, Glen. Editor's Notes: A Milestone.
* Beach, Sarah. “Mythopoesis.”
* Hyde, Paul Nolan. “Quenti Lambardillion: A Column on Middle-earth Linguistics.”

==== Reviews ====

* ''Boxen''. C. S. Lewis, edited by Walter Hooper. Reviewed by Nancy-Lou Patterson.
* ''The Discovery of King Arthur''. Geoffrey Ashe. Reviewed by Sarah Beach.
* ''Letters to Children.'' C.S. Lewis, edited by Lyle W. Dorsett and Marjorie Lamp Mead. Reviewed by Nancy-Lou Patterson.
* ''C.S. Lewis and the Search for Rational Religion.'' John Beversluis. Reviewed by Nancy-Lou Patterson. 
* ''Pleasures Forevermore — The Theology of C.S. Lewis.'' John Randolph Willis, SJ. Reviewed by Nancy-Lou Patterson.
{{mythlorenav|42|44}}
{{title|journal}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:Mythlore 043}}

[[Category:Mythlore]]