{{mythlore
|title=Mythlore 21
| image = Mythlore 21.gif
|editor=Gracia Fay Ellwood
|publisher=[[Mythopoeic Society]]
|date=Summer [[1979]]
|format=Paperback
|pages=47
}}
'''''Mythlore'' 21''' ([https://dc.swosu.edu/mythlore/vol6/iss3/ Volume 6, Issue 3]) is an issue of the ''[[Mythlore]]'' journal, published by the [[Mythopoeic Society]].

==Contents==

====Articles====

* Goselin, Peter Damien. “Two Faces of Eve: Galadriel and Shelob as Anima Figures.” 3-4.
* Patterson, Nancy-Lou. “Guardaci Ben: The Visionary Woman in C.S. Lewis’ Chronicles of Narnia and That Hideous Strength (Part 1).” 6-10.
* Chapman, Edgar L. “Anima Figures in a Demonic Comedy in the Lewis Tradition: E.E.Y. Hales’s Chariot of Fire.” 19-23.
* McGillis, Roderick F. “”If You Call Me Grandmother, That Will Do”.” 27-28.
* Wolfshohl, Clarence. “William Morris’s the Wood Beyond the World: The Victorian World Vs. The Mythic Eternities.” 29-32.
* Hannay, Margaret P. “Head Versus Heart in Dorothy L. Sayers’ Gaudy Night.” 33-37.
* Kotzin, Michael C. “Mrs. Moore as the Queen of Underland.” 46.

==== Features ====

* Letters. 11+.
* Patterson, Nancy-Lou. “Vision and Opinion: A Librarian’s Look at Fantasy.” Rev. of Waggoner, Diana. The Hills of Faraway: A Guide to Fantasy. 14.
* Patterson, Nancy-Lou. “Whimsical and Weighty.” Rev. of Sayers, Dorothy L. The Whimsical Christian. 14-15.
* Patterson, Nancy-Lou. “A World in a Grain of Sand.” Rev. of Kilby, Clyde S. Images of Salvation in the Fiction of C.S. Lewis. 15.
* Patterson, Nancy-Lou. “Treading the Road: The Christian Ethics of C.S. Lewis.” Rev. of Meilander, Gilbert. The Taste for the Other: The Social and Ethical Thought of C.S. Lewis. 16.
* Patterson, Nancy-Lou. “Sisterhood and Straw Bedding.” Rev. of Dale, Alzina Stone. Maker and Craftsman: The Story of Dorothy L. Sayers. 16-17.
* Colvin, George. “An Ever-Diverse Pair.” Rev. of McCaffrey, Anne. Dragondrums. Allan, Jim. An Introduction to Elvish. 17, 37.
* Speth, Lee. “Cavalier Treatment: Those Shakespearean Hags.” 18, 38.
* Ellwood, Gracia Fay. “Consort, Virgin, Adventurer.” 26, 37.
* Christopher, Joe R. “An Inklings Bibliography (10).” 38-45.

====Poetry====

* Ellwood, Gracia Fay. “Kyria Sophia.” 24+.
* Ellwood, Gracia Fay. “The Lady of La Salette.” 38.
* Walker, James C. (Untitled). 38.

====Art====

* Elizabeth Best: back cover
* Stephen P. Gaddis: 34
* Annette Harper: 21, 22, 23
* Joanne Gari: 16
* Mary Janis Johnson: 12, 41, 44
* Michael Logan: 24-25, 47
* Gary Meyers: 9
* Thadara Ottobris: 5
* Nancy-Lou Patterson: cover
* John Pivovarnick: 31
* Valerie Protopapas: 7, 32
{{mythlorenav|20|22}}
{{title|journal}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:Mythlore 021}}

[[Category:Mythlore]]