{{mythlore
|title=Mythlore 18
| image = Mythlore_18.gif
|editor=Gracia Fay Ellwood
|publisher=[[Mythopoeic Society]]
|date=Autumn [[1978]]
|format=Paperback
|pages=47
}}

'''''Mythlore'' 18''' ([https://dc.swosu.edu/mythlore/vol5/iss2/ Volume 5, Issue 2]) is an issue of the ''[[Mythlore]]'' journal, published by the [[Mythopoeic Society]].

==Contents==

====Articles====

* Geer, Caroline. “Land of Faerie: The Disappearing Myth.” 3-5.
* Chapman, Edgar L. “The Shaman as Hero and Spiritual Learer: Richard Adams’ Mythmaking in ''Watership Down'' and ''Shardik''.” 7-11.
* Lynch, James. “The Literary Banquet and the Eucharistic Feast: Tradition in Tolkien.” 13-14.
* Chard, Jean Marie. “Some Elements of Myth and Mysticism in C.S. Lewis’ Novel ''Till We Have Faces''.” 15-18.
* Kreig, Laurence J. “Levels of Symbolic Meaning in ''Pearl''.” 21-23.
* Hasty, Mara. “How the Isle of Ransom Reflects an Actual Icelandic Setting.” 24.
* Bailey, Mark. “The Honour and Glory of a Mouse: Reepicheep of Narnia.” 35-36, 46.
* Haykin, Michael. “A Note on Charles Williams’ ''The Place of the Lion''.” 37-38.
* Russell, Mariann. “‘The Northern Literature’ and the Ring Trilogy.” 41-42.

====Features====

* Letters. 25+.
* Colvin, George. “Good Work — and Great Fun.” Review of Middle Earth (game). 30-31.
* Patterson, Nancy-Lou. “Sarehole to Shire: The Definitive Tolkien.” Review of ''J.R.R. Tolkien: A Biography'' by Humphrey Carpenter; ''The Longing for a Form: Essays on the Fiction of C.S. Lewis'', edited by Peter J. Schakel. 31-33.
* Speth, Lee. “Review.” Review of ''Wonderful Wizard, Marvelous Land'' by Raylyn Moore. 33, 36, 46.
* Ellwood, Gracia Fay. Editorial. 38+.
* Christopher, Joe R. “An Inklings Bibliography (7).” 43-46.
* GoodKnight, Glen H. Founder’s Focus. 46.

====Poetry====

* Haynes, Renee. “The High Towers of Lorraine.” 6.
* Christopher, Joe R. “Endymion.” 19.
* Ellwood, Gracia Fay. “Star Calls.” 46.

====Art====

* Patrick Dengate: 23
* Charlie Dye: 14, 29
* Bonnie GoodKnight: 11, 24, 27, 39
* Annette Harper: cover, 12, 32
* Mary Ann Hodge: 46; Calligraphy: 6
* Michael Logan: 30
* R. Patrick McCabe: 20, 34, back cover
* Thadara Ottobris: 16, 17, 18, 31, 38, 40
* Diana Paxson: 25, 26, 42
* Kelley Wickham: 28
* Cover: Annette Harper, “Galadriel.”
* Back Cover: R. Patrick McCabe, “The Lord Brandoch Daha of Demonland.”
* Page 20: R. Patrick McCabe, “Queen Sophonisba.”
* Page 32: Annette Harper, “The Conception of Merlin.”
{{mythlorenav|17|19}}
{{title|journal}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:Mythlore 018}}

[[Category:Mythlore]]