{{mythlore
|title=Mythlore 34
| image = Mythlore 34.jpg
|editor=[[Glen GoodKnight]]
|publisher=[[Mythopoeic Society]]
|date=Winter [[1983]]
|format=Paperback
|pages=44
}}
'''''Mythlore'' 34''' ([https://dc.swosu.edu/mythlore/vol9/iss4/ Volume 9, Issue 4]) is an issue of the ''[[Mythlore]]'' journal, published by the [[Mythopoeic Society]].

==Contents==

====Articles====

* Ho, Tisa. “The Childlike Hobbit.” Mythlore 9.4 (#34) (1983): 3-9.
* Schakel, Peter J. “A Retelling within a Myth Retold: The Priest of Essur and Lewisian Mythopoetics.” Mythlore 9.4 (#34) (1983): 10-12.
* Hanger, Nancy C. “The Excellent Absurdity: Substitution and Co-Inherence in C.S. Lewis and Charles Williams.” Mythlore 9.4 (#34) (1983): 14-15.
* Zimmerman, Manfred. “The Origin of Gandalf and Josef Madlener.” Mythlore 9.4 (#34) (1983): 22, 24.
* Beare, Rhona. “Tolkien’s Calendar and Ithildin.” Mythlore 9.4 (#34) (1983): 23-24.
* Rawson, Ellen. “The Fisher King in That Hideous Strength.” Mythlore 9.4 (#34) (1983): 30-32.
* Christopher, Joe R. “Lewis Carroll, Scientifictionist (Part 2).” Mythlore 9.4 (#34) (1983): 45-48.
* Brunsdale, Mitzi M. “Norse Mythological Elements in the Hobbit.” Mythlore 9.4 (#34) (1983): 49-50, 55.

==== Features ====

* Hyde, Paul Nolan. “Quenti Lambardillion: A Column on Middle-Earth Linguistics.” Mythlore 9.4 (#34) (1983): 19-20, 32.
* Speth, Lee. “Cavalier Treatment: After the Dawn.” Rev. of Colquhoun, Ithell. Sword of Wisdom: MacGregor Mathers and the Golden Dawn. Mythlore 9.4 (#34) (1983): 26, 44.
* Beach, Sarah. “Mythopoesis: Creation (out of Chaos) and Derivation (Users and Lovers).” Mythlore 9.4 (#34) (1983): 27; 48.
* Christopher, Joe R. “An Inklings Bibliography (23).” Mythlore 9.4 (#34) (1982): 51-55.

==== Reviews ====

* Yates, Jessica. “A Blissful Supplement.” Rev. of Tolkien, J.R.R. Mr. Bliss. Mythlore 9.4 (#34) (1983): 38.
* Yates, Jessica. “The Road Goes Ever On.” Rev. of Shippey, T.A. The Road to Middle-earth. Mythlore 9.4 (#34) (1983): 38-40.
* Egan, Thomas M. “Whimsy and Tragedy.” Rev. of Dann, Jack and Gardner Dozois, eds. Unicorns! Mythlore 9.4 (#34) (1983): 40-41.
* Patterson, Nancy-Lou. “Gilding the Cat’s Whiskers.” Rev. of Lewis, C.S. Mere Christianity: An Anniversary Edition.  Lewis, C.S. The Pilgrim’s Regress. Ill. Michael Hague. Mythlore 9.4 (#34) (1983): 41-42.
* Patterson, Nancy-Lou. “From Dogmatism to Gentleness.” Rev. of Hannay, Margaret Patterson. C.S. Lewis. Mythlore 9.4 (#34) (1983): 42-43.
* Patterson, Nancy-Lou. “Sayers’ Best Pieces of Theology.” Rev. of Gaillard, Dawson. Dorothy L. Sayers.
* Panek, Leroy Lad. Watteau’s Shepherds: The Detective Novel in Britain 1914-1940. Mythlore 9.4 (#34) (1983): 43-44.
{{mythlorenav|33|35}}
{{title|journal}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:Mythlore 034}}
[[Category:Mythlore]]