{{mythlore
|title=''Mythlore'' 48, Volume 13, Issue 2
| image = Mythlore 48.png
|editor=[[Glen GoodKnight]]
|publisher=[[Mythopoeic Society]]
|date=Winter [[1986]]
|format=Paperback
|pages=63
}}
'''''Mythlore'' 48''' ([https://dc.swosu.edu/mythlore/vol13/iss2/ Volume 13, Issue 2]) is an issue of the ''[[Mythlore]]'' journal, published by the [[Mythopoeic Society]].
==Contents ==

==== Articles ====

* Kollmann, Judith. “The Figure of Beatrice in the Works of Charles Williams.”
* Boenig, Robert. “Tolkien and Old Germanic Ethics.”
* Bratman, David, et al. “A Centennial Retrospective on Charles Williams.”
* Bosky, Bernadette. “Even an Adept: Charles Williams and the Order of the Golden Dawn.”
* Mende, Lisa Anne. “Gondolin, Minas Tirith and the Eucatastrophe.”
* Warren, Colleen. “Wentworth in the Garden of Gomorrah: A Study of the Anima in Descent Into Hell.”
* Rawls, Melanie. “Herland and Out of the Silent Planet: A Comparison of a Feminist Utopia and a Male-charactered Fantasy.”
* Christopher, Joe R. “John Heath-Stubbs’ Artorius and the Influence of Charles Williams (Part 1).”

==== Poetry ====

* Christopher, Joe R. “The Song of Marian the Goddess.”

==== Features ====

* GoodKnight, Glen. Editor's Notes.
* Hyde, Paul Nolan. “Quenti Lambardillion: A Column on Middle-earth Linguistics: The Languages of Middle-earth (Part II).”
* Kondratiev, Alexei. “Tales Newly Told.”
* Letters.

==== Reviews ====

* ''The Shaping of Middle-earth: The Quenta, The Ambarkanta and The Annals, together with the earliest 'Silmarillion' and the First Map.'' J.R.R. Tolkien. Ed. by Christopher Tolkien. Reviewed by Glen GoodKnight.
* ''VII: An Anglo-American Literary Review.'' Reviewed by Nancy-Lou Patterson.
* ''The 1987 J.R.R. Tolkien Calendar.'' Illustrated by Alan Lee, Roger Garland, Ted Nasmith and John Howe. Reviewed by Glen GoodKnight.
* ''Dragons of Light.'' Ace Books. Reviewed by Thomas M. Egan.
* ''Dragons of Darkness.'' Ace Books. Reviewed by Thomas M. Egan.
* ''The Stars and the Stillness: A Portrait of George MacDonald.'' Kathy Triggs. Reviewed by Nancy-Lou Patterson.
{{mythlorenav|47|49}}
{{title|journal}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:Mythlore 048}}

[[Category:Mythlore]]