{{mythlore
|title=Mythlore 6
| image = Mythlore_6.gif
|editor=[[Glen GoodKnight]]
|publisher=[[Mythopoeic Society]]
|date=Autumn [[1970]]
|format=Paperback
|pages=29
}}

'''''Mythlore'' 6''' ([https://dc.swosu.edu/mythlore/vol2/iss2/ Volume 2, Issue 2])  is an issue of the ''[[Mythlore]]'' journal, published by the [[Mythopoeic Society]].

== Contents ==

==== Features ====

* GoodKnight, Glen. The Counsel of Elrond: "Affirming the Images." 3.
* Zuber, Bernie. Across the Brandywine. 3.
* Alpajpuri. World of Fanzines. 4.
* "Charles Williams: A Short Reading List." 5.
* Missives to Mythlore. 26.

==== Articles ====

* Schideler, Mary McDermott. "Exerpts from a Letter About Charles Williams." 6.
* Hannay, Margaret P. "Arthurian and Cosmic Myth in ''That Hideous Strength''." 7-9.
* Peoples, Galen. "The Agnostic in the Whirlwind: The Seven Novels of Charles Williams." 10-15.
* Williams, Charles. "Letters in Hell." Review of ''The Screwtape Letters'' by C.S. Lewis. 22.
* Christopher, Joe R. "An Introduction to Narnia, Part 1: The Chronology of the Chronicles." 23-25.

==== Fiction ====

* Williams, Charles. "The Noises That Weren't There. Chapter 1: The Noises That Weren't There." 17-21.

==== Poetry ====

* Williams, Charles. "To Michael: Sonnets after Marriage.' 5.
* Sadler, Glenn Edward. "On Seeing Amen House Demolished." 6.
* "Lines on the Reverend's Black Beard." 21.
* Wilson, Simone. "To Michal Williams." 21.
* McMenomy, Bruce. "Song of Joy." 25.

==== Art ====

* Bonnie Bergstrom: 3, 17, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 29, back cover
* Katherine Cribbs: 28
* Barbi Johnson: 16
* Tim Kirk: 7, 8, 9, 23, 25, 26, 27
* Bruce McMenomy: 29
* Diana Paxson: 27
* Susan Schulman: 28
* Angel Selpope: 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15
* Bernie Zuber: cover, 4
* Cover: Bernie Zuber, "... he heard, in the very center of the syllables, another single note" from ''All Hallows' Eve'' by Charles Williams
* Back Cover: Bonnie Bergstrom, "She heard the voice once more: 'I have seen the salvation of my God" from ''Descent into Hell'' by Charles Williams
* Page 5: Photograph courtesy of Glenn Sadler
{{mythlorenav|5|7}}

{{title|journal}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:Mythlore 006}}
[[Category:Mythlore]]