{{mythlore
|title=Mythlore 9
| image = Mythlore 9.png
|editor=[[Glen GoodKnight]]
|publisher=[[Mythopoeic Society]]
|date=[[1973]]
|format=Paperback
|pages=31
}}
'''''Mythlore'' 9''' ([https://dc.swosu.edu/mythlore/vol3/iss1/ Volume 3, Issue 1]) is an issue of the ''[[Mythlore]]'' journal, published by the [[Mythopoeic Society]]. The issue is the same as ''[[Tolkien Journal]]'' issue 16.<ref>[https://www.mythsoc.org/mythlore/mythlore-9.htm Mythlore 9] at [http://www.mythsoc.org/ Mythsoc.org] (accessed 30 December 2011)</ref>
==Contents==

====Articles====

*[[James Allan|All[a]n, James]]. “Genesis of ''The Lord of the Rings'': A Study of Saga Development,” (Attributed to the pseudonym Dzhimælæn 289PL56-d78; errata list of dropped passages in [https://www.mythsoc.org/mythlore/mythlore-12.htm Mythlore 12], p. 26) 3.

*Paxson, Diana. “The Holy Grail.” 10-11, 31.
*Christopher, Joe R. “An Introduction to Narnia, Part 4: The Literary Classification of the Chronicles.” 12-15, 27.
*“The Mythopoeic Press: A Proposal.” 18+.
*GoodKnight, Glen and Frederick M. Brenion. “Walter Hooper — A Thank You.” 28+.

====Features====
*[[Bernie Zuber|Zuber, Bernie]]. Across the Brandywine. 16+.
*Missives to Mythlore. 20+.
*Patterson, Nancy-Lou. “Gracia-Fay Ellwood: Good News from Tolkien’s Middle Earth: Two Essays on the ‘Applicability’ of ''The Lord of the Rings''.” Review of ''Good News From Tolkien’s Middle Earth'' by Gracia-Fay Ellwood. 25-26.
*Christopher, Joe R. “Tolkien Criticism: An Annotated Checklist.” Review of Tolkien Criticism: An Annotated Checklist compiled by Richard C. West. 26-27.
*GoodKnight, Glen. The Counsel of Elrond. 30.

====Art====
*Annette Harper: cover, 19
*John Urmacher: 2, back cover
*Bonnie GoodKnight: 3, 28, 30
*Diana Paxson: 10, 11
*[[Tim Kirk]]: 16, 20, 25, 31
*[[Paula Marmor]]: 21, 22
*James Shull 23
{{mythlorenav|8|10}}

{{title|journal}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:Mythlore 009}}

==References==
{{Reflist}}
[[Category:Mythlore]]
<references />