{{mythlore
|title=Mythlore 13
| image = Mythlore_13.gif
|editor=[[Glen GoodKnight]]
|publisher=[[Mythopoeic Society]]
|date=September [[1976]]
|format=Paperback
|pages=39
}}

'''''Mythlore'' 13''' ([https://dc.swosu.edu/mythlore/vol4/iss1/ Volume 4, Issue 1]) is an issue of the ''[[Mythlore]]'' journal, published by the [[Mythopoeic Society]].

== Contents ==

====Articles====

* Lense, Edward. “Sauron Is Watching You: The Role of the Great Eye in the Lord of the Rings.” 3-6.
* Barfield, Owen. “Some Reflections on ''The Great Divorce'' of C.S. Lewis.” 7-8.
* Christopher, Joe R. “Dorothy L. Sayers and the Inklings.” 8-9.
* Rose, Ellen Cronan. “A Briefing for Briefing: Charles Williams’ ''Descent into Hell'' and Doris Lessing’s ''Briefing for a Descent into Hell''.” 10-13.
* Hannay, Margaret P. “”Surprised by Joy”: C.S. Lewis’ Changing Attitudes toward Women.” 15-20.

====Features====

* Patterson, Nancy-Lou. “Tolkien and the Silmarillion.” Review of ''Tolkien and the Silmarillion'' by Clyde S. Kilby. 21. 
* Colvin, George. “A Farrago of Fantasy.” Review of ''The Compleat Enchanter'' by L. Sprague de Camp and Fletcher Pratt, ''Gerfalcon'' by Leslie Barringer, and ''Golden Wings and Other Stories'' by William Morris. 22-23.
* Christopher, Joe R. “Rites of a Rosicrucian Mystic.” Review of ''J.R. Evelyn Underhill (1875-1941): An Introduction to Her Life and Writings'' by Christopher Armstrong.
* Letters. 26+.
* Christopher, Joe R. “An Inklings Bibliography (2).” 33-38.

====Art====

* Unknown: 3, 14, 18, 31, 32
* Annette Harper: cover, 10, 13
* Michael Kucharski: 26, 27, 28, 29
* Barry Kent MacKay: back cover
* Barbara Mann: 22, 24
* Valerie Protopapas: 30
* Peter Thorpe: 32
* Cover: Annette Harper, Unknown
* Back Cover: Barry Kent McKay, The Future Mrs. Bultitude
{{mythlorenav|12|14}}

{{title|journal}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:Mythlore 013}}
[[Category:Mythlore]]