{{mythlore
|title=''Mythlore'' 69, Volume 18, Issue 3
| image = Mythlore 69.png
|editor=[[Glen GoodKnight]]
|publisher=[[Mythopoeic Society]]
|date=Summer [[1992]]
|format=Paperback
|pages=79
}}
'''''Mythlore'' 69''' ([https://dc.swosu.edu/mythlore/vol18/iss3/ Volume 18, Issue 3]) is an issue of the ''[[Mythlore]]'' journal, published by the [[Mythopoeic Society]].

The article "[[Gondolinic Runes]]" by [[Paul Nolan Hyde]] includes a facsimile of a manuscript by [[J.R.R. Tolkien]] followed by a lengthy analysis (a response to the article was published in [[Mythlore 70|''Mythlore'' 70]], by [[Carl F. Hostetter]]).<ref>[http://www.tolkienbooks.net/php/languages.php Languages and Alphabets] at [http://www.tolkienbooks.net Tolkienbooks.net] (accessed 27 August 2011)</ref>

==Contents==

====Articles====

* Manganiello, Dominic. “The Neverending Story: Textual Happiness in ''The Lord of the Rings''.”
* Graff, Eric S. “The Three Faces of Faërie in Tolkien's Shorter Fiction: Niggle, Smith, and Giles.”
* Mathews, Richard. “The Edges of Reality in Tolkien's Tale of Aldarion and Erendis.”
* GoodKnight, Glen H. “Tributes to J.R.R. Tolkien.”
* GoodKnight, Glen H. “J.R.R. Tolkien in Translation.”

====Features====

* GoodKnight, Glen H. Editorial Introduction: In This Issue.
* Christopher, Joe. R., and Wayne G. Hammond. An Inklings Bibliography (46).
* Reynolds, Trevor. Index to J.R.R. Tolkien in ''Mythlore'' Issues 1-69.
* Hyde, Paul Nolan. “Quenti Lambardillion.”
* Kondratiev, Alexei. “Tales Newly Told.”
* Letters.
* Callahan, Bg, Patrick Wynne, Paula DiSante, and Sarah Beach. “Artists' Comments.”
* Mythlore Staff. “The Mythopoeic Society.”

====Reviews====

* ''Sauron Defeated.'' J.R.R. Tolkien; Ed. Christopher R. Tolkien. Reviewed by Paul Nolan Hyde.
* ''The Lord of the Rings.'' J.R.R. Tolkien; Illust. Alan Lee. Reviewed by Glen GoodKnight.
* ''The Tolkien Family Album.'' John and Priscilla Tolkien. Reviewed by Nancy-Lou Patterson.
* ''J.R.R. Tolkien, Master of Fantasy.'' David R. Collins. Reviewed by Nancy-Lou Patterson.
{{mythlorenav|68|70}}
{{references}}
{{title|journal}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:Mythlore 069}}

[[Category:Mythlore]]