{{mythlore
|title=''Mythlore'' 65, Volume 17, Issue 3
| image = Mythlore 65.jpg
|editor=[[Glen GoodKnight]]
|publisher=[[Mythopoeic Society]]
|date=Spring [[1991]]
|format=Paperback
|pages=67
}}
'''''Mythlore'' 65''' ([https://dc.swosu.edu/mythlore/vol17/iss3/ Volume 17, Issue 3]) is an issue of the ''[[Mythlore]]'' journal, published by the [[Mythopoeic Society]] and featuring a cover illustration by [[Patrick Wynne]]. The issue reprints an article by [[Christopher Gilson]] and Patrick Wynne from [[Vinyar Tengwar 14|''Vinyar Tengwar'' 14]]: 'The Elves at Koivienéni: A New Quenya Sentence'.  This includes a previously unpublished [[Quenya]] sentence found in a manuscript at [[Marquette University]].<ref>''An Illustrated Tolkien Bibliography'' on Tolkienbooks.net</ref>

==Contents==

====Articles====

* Hostetter, Carl F. “Over Middle-earth Sent Unto Men: On the Philological Origins of Tolkien's Eärendel Myth.”
* GoodKnight, Glen H., Joe R. Christopher, Alexei Kondratiev, and Diana L. Paxson. “The Inklings in America.”
* Thorson, Stephen. “Lewis and Barfield on Imagination: Part II.”
* Gilson, Christopher, and Patrick Wynne. “The Elves at Koivienéni: A New Quenya Sentence.”
* Louis, M. K. “Arthurian Wantons: Language, Lust, and Time in Victorian Poetry and Drama.”
* Hyde, Paul Nolan. “A Comprehensive Index of Proper Names and Phrases in ''The Hobbit''.”
* Le Guin, Ursula K., Todd Barton, Margaret Chodos-Irvine, and George Hersh. “The Making of ''Always Coming Home''.”

====Features====

* GoodKnight, Glen. Editorial Introduction: War and Priorities.
* Christopher, Joe R., and Wayne G. Hammond. An Inklings Bibliography.
* Hyde, Paul Nolan. “Quenti Lambardillion: A Column on Middle-earth Linguistics - Pointing With An Index Finger: ‘Five feet high with door and three may walk abreast’.”
* Letters.

====Reviews====

* ''Outline of Romantic Theology.'' Charles Williams. Reviewed by Nancy-Lou Patterson.
* ''The Saga of Volsungs: The Norse Epic of Sigurd the Dragon Slayer.'' Intro and Translation by Jesse L. Byock. Reviewed by Nancy-Lou Patterson.
* ''Children and Their Books: A Celebration of the Work of Iona and Peter Opie.'' Ed. Gillian Avery and Julia Briggs. Reviewed by Pat Reynolds.
* ''The C.S. Lewis Handbook.'' Colin Duriez. Reviewed by Glen GoodKnight.
* ''Let There Be Light. Ill.'' Pauline Baynes. Reviewed by Glen GoodKnight.
* ''The Encyclopedia of Witches and Witchcraft.'' Rosemary Ellen Guiley. Reviewed by David Bratman.
{{mythlorenav|64|66}}
{{references}}
{{title|journal}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:Mythlore 065}}
[[Category:Publications with contribution by J.R.R. Tolkien]]
[[Category:Mythlore]]