{{mythlore
|title=''Mythlore'' 56, Volume 15, Issue 2
| image = Mythlore 56.jpg
|editor=[[Glen GoodKnight]]
|publisher=[[Mythopoeic Society]]
|date=Winter [[1988]]
|format=Paperback
|pages=67
}}
'''''Mythlore'' 56''' ([https://dc.swosu.edu/mythlore/vol15/iss2/ Volume 15, Issue 2]) is an issue of the ''[[Mythlore]]'' journal, published by the [[Mythopoeic Society]] and featuring a cover illustration by [[Patrick Wynne]].

The article "Narqelion: A Single, Falling Leaf at Sun-fading" by [[Paul Nolan Hyde]] (reprinted in ''[[Vinyar Tengwar 6]]'') includes the full text of [[J.R.R. Tolkien]]'s poem '[[Narqelion]]' (4 lines were reproduced in [[Humphrey Carpenter]]'s ''[[J.R.R. Tolkien: A Biography]]'' in 1977). The poem is also reproduced in a computer tengwar font on the lower cover.<ref>''An Illustrated Tolkien Bibliography'' on Tolkienbooks.net</ref>

==Contents==

====Articles====

*Le Guin, Ursula K. “Legends for a New Land: Guest of Honor Speech at the 19th Annual Mythopoeic Conference.”
*Thompson, Kristin. “''The Hobbit'' as a Part of ''The Red Book of Westmarch''.”
*Christopher, Joe R. “J.R.R. Tolkien: Narnian Exile - Part II.”
*Attebery, Brian. “Reclaiming the Modern World for the Imagination: Guest of Honor Speech at the 19th Annual Mythopoeic Conference.”
*Hood, Gwenyth. “Husbands and Gods as Shadowbrutes: Beauty and the Beast from Apuleius to C.S. Lewis.”
*Yates, Jessica. “Roger Lancelyn Green: A Personal Memoir.”
*Treloar, John L., S.J. “Tolkien and Christian Concepts of Evil: Apocalypse and Privation."

====Features====

*GoodKnight, Glen and Sarah Beach. Editorial Opening.
*Christopher, Joe R. An Inklings' Bibliography (33).
*Hyde, Paul Nolan. “Quenti Lambardillion.”
*Kondratiev, Alexei. “Tales Newly Told.”
*Letters.

====Reviews====

*''Jack: C.S. Lewis and His Times.'' George Sayer. Reviewed by Nancy-Lou Patterson.
*''Mythical and Fabulous Creatures: A Source Book and Research Guide.'' Malcom South, ed. Reviewed by Nancy-Lou Patterson.
{{mythlorenav|55|57}}
{{references}}

{{title|journal}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:Mythlore 056}}
[[Category:Publications with contribution by J.R.R. Tolkien]]
[[Category:Mythlore]]