{{mythlore
|title=''Mythlore'' 50, Volume 13, Issue 4
| image = Mythlore 50.gif
|editor=[[Glen GoodKnight]]
|publisher=[[Mythopoeic Society]]
|date=Summer [[1987]]
|format=Paperback
|pages=63
}}
'''''Mythlore'' 50''' ([https://dc.swosu.edu/mythlore/vol13/iss4/ Volume 13, Issue 4]) is an issue of the ''[[Mythlore]]'' journal, published by the [[Mythopoeic Society]].

In a letter published in the journal (p.&nbsp;41), [[L. Sprague de Camp]] quotes from [[Letter to L. Sprague de Camp|a 1964 letter from Tolkien]].<ref>{{CG|C}}, p. 622</ref>

== Contents ==

==== Articles ====

* Wytenbroe, J. R. “Rites of Passage in The Hobbit.”
* Hyles, Vernon. “On the Nature of Evil: The Cosmic Myths of Lewis, Tolkien and Williams.”
* Musacchio, George. “Elwin Ransom: The Pilgrimage Begins.”
* Croft, Edward. “Where Words Fall Short: Limitations of Language in All Hallows' Eve.”
* Filmer, Kath. “An Allegory Unveiled: A Reading of The Lord of the Rings.”
* Agøy, Nils Ivar. “A Nodal Structure in Tolkien’s Tales of the First Age?”
* Unwin, Rayner, et al. “20 Years and 50 Issues.”
* Schakel, Peter J. “That ‘Hideous Strength’ in Lewis and Orwell: A Comparison and Contrast.”
* Welch, Randy C. “Watership Down: The Individual & Society.”
* Christopher, Joe R. “John Heath-Stubbs’ Artorius and the Influence of Charles Williams.”

==== Poetry ====

* Le Guin, Ursula K. “NM.”
* Yolen, Jane. “Amesbury Song.”

==== Features ====

* GoodKnight, Glen. Editor's Opening - Two Decades: Looking Back.
* Christopher, Joe R. An Inklings' Bibliography (31).
* Kondratiev, Alexei. “Tales Newly Told.”
* Hyde, Paul Nolan. “Quenti Lambardillion: A Column on Middle-earth Linguistics.”
* Letters.

==== Reviews ====

* ''The Hobbit, or There and Back Again.'' J.R.R. Tolkien, Illustrated by the author, Foreword by Christopher Tolkien. Reviewed by Nancy-Lou Patterson.
* ''C.S. Lewis.'' Joe R. Christopher. Reviewed by Nancy-Lou Patterson.
* ''Daughter of Regals & Other Tales.'' Stephen R. Donaldson. Reviewed by Thomas M. Egan.
* ''Elfquest — The Blood of Ten Chiefs, Volume One.'' Edited by Richard Pini, Robert Asprin, and Lynn Abby. Reviewed by David Bratman.
* ''Shadowlands''. Film produced by the BBC and the Episcopal Radio-TV Foundation. Directed by Norman Stone; written by William Nicholson. Reviewed by David Bratman.
* ''Charles Williams.'' Kathleen Spencer. Reviewed by Nancy-Lou Patterson.
* ''Around the Year with C.S. Lewis and His Friends.'' Kathryn Lindskoog, compiler. Reviewed by Nancy-Lou Patterson.
{{mythlorenav|49|51}}
{{references}}
{{title|journal}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:Mythlore 050}}

[[Category:Mythlore]]