{{mythlore
|title=''Mythlore'' 95/96, Volume 25, Issue 1/2
| image = Mythlore 95-96.jpg
|editor=[[Janet Brennan Croft]]
|publisher=[[Mythopoeic Society]]
|date=Fall/Winter [[2007]]
|format=Paperback journal
|pages=216
}}
'''''Mythlore'' 95/96''' ([https://dc.swosu.edu/mythlore/vol25/iss1/ Volume 25, Issue 1/2]) is an issue of the ''[[Mythlore]]'' journal, published by the [[Mythopoeic Society]].

==Contents==

==== Articles ====

* Whetter, K. S., and R. Andrew McDonald. "'In the Hilt is Fame': Resonances of Medieval Swords and Sword-lore in J.R.R. Tolkien's ''The Hobbit'' and ''The Lord of the Rings''."
* Wriglesworth, Chad. "'Myth Maker, Unicorn Maker': C.S. Lewis and the Reshaping of Medieval Thought."
* Hall, Mark F. "The Theory and Practice of Alliterative Verse in the Work of J.R.R. Tolkien."
* Bossert, A. R. "'Surely You Don't Disbelieve': Tolkien and Pius X: Anti-Modernism in Middle-earth."
* Livingston, Michael. "The Shell-shocked Hobbit: The First World War and Tolkien's Trauma of the Ring."
* Carlson, David J. "Lord Dunsany and the Great War: ''Don Rodriguez'' and the Rebirth of Romance."
* Hooper, Teresa. "Playing by the Rules: Kipling's 'Great Game' vs. 'The Great Dance' in C.S. Lewis's Space Trilogy."
* Amison, Anne. "An Unexpected Guest."
* Steele, Felicia Jean. "Dreaming of Dragons: Tolkien's Impact on Heaney's ''Beowulf''."
* Fife, Ernelle. "Wise Warriors in Tolkien, Lewis, and Rowling."
* Brown, Devin. "From Isolation to Community: Frodo's Incomplete Personal Quest in ''The Lord of the Rings''."
* Treschow, Michael, and Mark Duckworth. "Bombadil's Role in ''The Lord of the Rings''."
* Riga, Frank P. "'Where is that Worthless Dreamer?' Bottom's Fantastic Redemption in Hoffman's ''A Midsummer Night's Dream.''"

====Features====

*Croft, Janet Brennan. Editorial.
{{mythlorenav|93/94|97/98}}
{{title|journal}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:Mythlore 095/096}}

[[Category:Mythlore]]