{{mythlore
|title=Mythlore 39
| image = Mythlore 39.png
|editor=[[Glen GoodKnight]]
|publisher=[[Mythopoeic Society]]
|date=Summer [[1984]]
|format=Paperback
|pages=63
}}
'''''Mythlore'' 39''' ([https://dc.swosu.edu/mythlore/vol11/iss1/ Volume 11, Issue 1]) is an issue of the ''[[Mythlore]]'' journal, published by the [[Mythopoeic Society]].

==Contents==

====Articles====

* Bergvall, Ake. “A Myth Retold: C.S. Lewis' Till We Have Faces.”
* Houghton, John. “Rochester The Renewer: The Byronic Hero and The Messiah as Elements in The King Elessar.”
* Kenney, Alice P. “Mistress of Creation.”
* Paxton, Diana. “The Tolkien Tradition.”
* Harrod, Elizabeth. “Trees in Tolkien, and What Happened Under Them.”
* Berman, Ruth. “Dragons for Tolkien and Lewis.”

==== Poetry ====

* Benedict, Marthe. “Dwellers in the Land of Dreams.”
* Christopher, Joe R. “A Night at Mara's House.”

==== Features ====

* GoodKnight, Glen H. Editorial: The Love of Old Friends
* Christopher, Joe R. An Inklings Bibliography (28).
* Hyde, Paul Nolan. “Quenti Lambardillion.”
* Beach, Sarah. “Mythopoesis.”
* Letters

==== Reviews ====

* ''The Book of Lost Tales.'' J.R.R. Tolkien. Reviewed by Jessica Yates.
* ''The Book of Lost Tales.'' J.R.R. Tolkien. Reviewed by Thomas M. Egan.
* ''Splintered Light: Logos and Language in Tolkien's World.'' Verlyn Flieger. Reviewed by Nancy-Lou Patterson.
* ''Reason and Imagination in C.S. Lewis—A Study of till We Have Faces.'' Peter J. Schakel. Reviewed by Nancy-Lou Patterson.
* ''In Search of C.S. Lewis.'' Stephen Schofield. Reviewed by Nancy-Lou Patterson.
* ''Spirits in Bondage, a Cycle of Lyrics.'' C.S. Lewis. Reviewed by Lawrence Mack Hall.
* ''The Lion, the Witch, and the Wardrobe.'' C.S. Lewis. Reviewed by Nancy-Lou Patterson.
* ''SEVEN: An Anglo-American Literary review, Vol. 5.'' Wheaton College. Reviewed by Nancy-Lou Patterson.
* ''Finn and Hengest: The Fragment and the Episode.'' J.R.R. Tolkien. Reviewed by Thomas M. Egan.
{{mythlorenav|38|40}}
{{title|journal}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:Mythlore 039}}

[[Category:Mythlore]]