{{mythlore
|title=Mythlore 31
| image = Mythlore 31.png
|editor=[[Glen GoodKnight]]
|publisher=[[Mythopoeic Society]]
|date=Spring [[1982]]
|format=Paperback
|pages=47
}}
'''''Mythlore'' 31''' ([https://dc.swosu.edu/mythlore/vol9/iss1/ Volume 9, Issue 1]) is an issue of the ''[[Mythlore]]'' journal, published by the [[Mythopoeic Society]].

==Contents==

====Articles ====

*Price, Meredith. “‘All Shall Love Me and Despair’: The Figure of Lilith in Tolkien, Lewis, Williams, and Sayers.” 3-7, 26.
*Pope, Elizabeth. “The Attic of Faerie.” 8-10.
*Christopher, Joe R. “C.S. Lewis Dances among the Elves: A Dull and Scholarly Survey of Spirits in Bondage and ‘The Queen of Drum’.” 11-17, 47.
*Purdy, Margaret R. “Symbols of Immortality: A Comparison of European and Elvish Heraldry.” 19-22, 36.
*Knapp, Bettina. “A Jungian Reading of ''The Kalevala'' 500-1300?: Finnish Shamanism — The Patriarchal Senex Figure, Part III: The Anima Archetype.” 35-36.

====Reviews====

*Patterson, Nancy-Lou. “Art and Reality.” (Review of ''[[The Letters of J.R.R. Tolkien]]''.) 27-28.
* Patterson, Nancy-Lou. “Lewis Number Two.” (Review of ''The Visionary Christian''.) 28-29.
*Yates, Jessica. “Boorman’s Arthur.” (Review of ''Excalibur'' by John Boorman.) 28-29.
*Speth, Lee. “Cavalier Treatment: The Sword of Ethandune.” (Review of ''The Ballad of the White Horse'' by G.K. Chesterton.) 32-33.

====Other Features====

*Christopher, Joe R. “An Inklings Bibliography (20).” 37-41.
*[[David Bratman|Bratman, David]]. “Subject Index to Mythlore, Issues 1-30.” 42-47.
{{mythlorenav|30|32}}

{{title|journal}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:Mythlore 031}}
[[Category:Mythlore]]