{{mythlore
|title=Mythlore 10: The J.R.R. Tolkien Memorial Issue
| image = Mythlore_10.gif
|editor=[[Glen GoodKnight]]
|publisher=[[Mythopoeic Society]]
|date=[[1975]]
|format=Paperback
|pages=35
}}
'''''Mythlore'' 10''' ([https://dc.swosu.edu/mythlore/vol3/iss2/ Volume 3, Issue 2]) is an issue of the ''[[Mythlore]]'' journal, published by the [[Mythopoeic Society]]. It is the same as ''[[Tolkien Journal]]'' issue 17.<ref>[https://www.mythsoc.org/mythlore/mythlore-10.htm Mythlore 10] at [http://www.mythsoc.org/ Mythsoc.org] (accessed 30 December 2011)</ref>

[[Glen GoodKnight]]'s article "Death and the Desire for Deathlessness: The Counsel of Elrond" contains a [[Letter to Herbert Schiro|letter dated 17 November 1957 to Dr. Herbert Schiro]] (p.&nbsp;19), in which [[J.R.R. Tolkien]] discusses allegory in ''[[The Lord of the Rings]]'' and argues that is about death and deathlessness, not power and dominion.<ref>[http://www.tolkienbooks.net/php/details.php?reference=61440 Mythlore 10. 1975] at [http://www.tolkienbooks.net/ TolkienBooks.net] (accessed 30 December 2011)</ref> This letter was later partially published in ''[[The Letters of J.R.R. Tolkien]]'' as [[Letter 203]].

==Contents==
====Articles====
*Glover, Willis B. “The Christian Character of Tolkien’s Invented World.” 3-8.
*In Tribute: “What J.R.R. Tolkien Means to Some of His Admirers.” 10+.
*Basney, Lionel. “The Place of Myth in a Mythical Land: Two Notes (Converging).” 15-17.
*Bisenicks, Dainis. “Power and Poetry in Middle-earth.” 20-24.
*Christopher, Joe R. “A Note on an Unpublished (and Probably Unwritten) Collaboration.” 29.
*Services in Oxford and Los Angeles. 30.
*GoodKnight, Glen. The Counsel of Elrond: “Death and the Desire for Deathlessness.” 19.

====Features====

*Patterson, Nancy-Lou. “The Tree of Tales Grows Ever Green.” Review of ''[[Master of Middle-earth|Master of Middle Earth: The Fiction of J.R.R. Tolkien]]'' by [[Paul H. Kocher]]. 25-26.
*Covey, Winton. “Der Herr Der Ringe.” Review of Der Herr der Ringe, translated by Margaret Carroux. 27.
*Meskys, Ed. The Green Dragon. 28.
*Missives to Mythlore. 31.

====Art====

*George Barr: 2

*Lorne DeKun: 10
*Steve Fabian: 9
*Bonnie GoodKnight: 4, 5, 6, 7, 21, 22, 31
*Annette Harper: 29, 32, 33, back cover
*[[Tim Kirk]]: cover, 18
*Barbara Mann: 25
*[[Paula Marmor]]: 16, 17, 35
*John Uhrumacher: 34
*Cover: Tim Kirk, “Niggle seeing the Tree”
{{mythlorenav|9|11}}
{{References}}
{{title|journal}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:Mythlore 010}}
[[Category:Mythlore]]