{{mythlore
|title=Mythlore 12
| image = Mythlore_12.gif
|editor=[[Glen GoodKnight]]
|publisher=[[Mythopoeic Society]]
|date=June [[1976]]
|format=Paperback
|pages=39
}}

'''''Mythlore'' 12''' ([https://dc.swosu.edu/mythlore/vol3/iss4/ Volume 3, Issue 4]) is an issue of the ''[[Mythlore]]'' journal, published by the [[Mythopoeic Society]].

== Contents ==

====Articles====

* Harwood, A.C. “A Toast to the Memory of C.S. Lewis.” 3-5.
* Hooper, Walter. “Reminiscences.” 5-9.
* Chapman, Ed. “Toward a Sacramental Ecology: Technology, Nature and Transcendence in C.S. Lewis’s Ransom Trilogy.” 10-17.
* Bisenieks, Dainis. “A Postscript on Kenneth Morris (1879-1937).” 17.
* Lindskoog, Kathryn. “C.S. Lewis: Reactions from Women.” 18-20.

====Features====

* Christopher, Joe R. “Jung’s Journey through Hell, Purgatory and Heaven.” Review of ''Dark Wood to White Rose: A Study of Meanings in Dante’s Divine Comedy'' by Helen M. Luke. 21-22.
* Colvin, George. “Chronicles of Christ and Constantine.” Review of ''The Singer'' by Calvin Miller and ''The Emperor Constantine: A Chronicle'' by Dorothy L. Sayers. 22-24.
* Patterson, Nancy-Lou. “Decisions & Wizards.” Review of ''Mithrandir and Middle Earth: A World in Conflict'' by Stephen O. Miller. 24-25.
* GoodKnight, Glen H. Editorial. 26.
* Letters. 27+.
* Christopher, Joe R. “An Inklings Bibliography (1).” 30.

====Art====

* Bonnie GoodKnight: 9, 10, 18; Photographs: 3, 4, 7
* Tim Kirk: 2
* Taral Wayne MacDonald: 13, 14, 15
* Valerie Protopapas: 17, 22, 23, 25, 27
* Roberta Weiner: 21
* Deb Webber: Letter on 27
{{mythlorenav|11|13}}

{{title|journal}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:Mythlore 012}}
[[Category:Mythlore]]