{{mythlore
|title=''Mythlore'' 121/122, Volume 31, Issue 3/4
| image = Mythlore 121 122.gif
|editor=[[Janet Brennan Croft]]
|publisher=[[Mythopoeic Society]]
|date=Spring/Summer [[2013]]
|format=Paperback
|pages=148
}}
'''''Mythlore'' 121/122''' ([https://dc.swosu.edu/mythlore/vol31/iss3/ Volume 31, Issue 3/4]) is an issue of the ''[[Mythlore]]'' journal, published by the [[Mythopoeic Society]].

In the article "Disparaging Narnia: Reconsidering Tolkien's View of ''The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe''", [[Josh B. Long]] quotes two formerly unpublished excerpts from letters by [[J.R.R. Tolkien]] (to [[Letter to Mrs Munby]] and [[Letter to Eileen Elgar (24 December 1971)]]).

==Contents==

====Articles ====

* Lionarons, Joyce Tally. "Of Spiders and Elves."
* Birns, Nicholas. "'The Inner Consistency of Reality': Intermediacy in The Hobbit."
* Long, Josh B. "Disparaging Narnia: Reconsidering Tolkien's View of The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe."
* Saxton, Benjamin. "J.R.R. Tolkien, Sub-Creation, and Theories of Authorship."
* Mitchell, Phillip Irving. "'But Grace is Not Infinite': Tolkien's Explorations of Nature and Grace in His Catholic Context."
* Christie, E. J. "Sméagol and Déagol: Secrecy, History, and Ethical Subjectivity in Tolkien's World."

====Features====  

*Croft, Janet Brennan. Editorial.
*Letters: A Narnian Clarification. Michael Ward.

====Reviews====

* ''C.S. Lewis, Poetry, and the Great War 1914-1918.'' John Bremer. Reviewed by Joe R. Christopher.
* ''Collected Poems.'' Hope Mirrlees. Ed. and intro. Sandeep Parmar. Reviewed by Nicholas Birns.
* ''Fantasy, Art and Life: Essays on George MacDonald, Robert Louis Stevenson and Other Fantasy Writers.'' William Gray. Reviewed by Scott McLaren.
* ''C. S. Lewis and the Middle Ages.'' Robert Boenig. Reviewed by Holly Ordway.
* ''Sherlock Holmes for the 21st Century: Essays on New Adaptations.'' Edited by Lynnette Porter. Reviewed by Janet Brennan Croft.
* ''Dancing the Tao: Le Guin and Moral Development.'' Sandra J. Lindow. Reviewed by Carl Badgley.
* ''Hobbit Place-names: A Linguistic Excursion Through the Shire.'' Rainer Nagel. Reviewed by Troels Forchhammer.
* ''The Broken Scythe: Death and Immortality in the Works of J.R.R. Tolkien.'' Edited by Roberto Arduini and Claudio A. Testi. Reviewed by Harley J. Sims.
* ''The Hobbit Tarot.'' Terry Donaldson (author of guide pamphlet) and Peter Pracownik (artist). Reviewed by Emily A Auger.
* ''The Lord of the Rings Tarot Deck and Card Game.'' Terry Donaldson (author of guidebook), Peter Pracownik (artist), and Mike Fitzgerald (game rules). Reviewed by Emily A Auger.
* ''J.K. Rowling: Harry Potter.'' Edited by Cynthia J. Hallett and Peggy J. Huey. Reviewed by Janet Brennan Croft.
{{mythlorenav|119/120|123}}
{{title|journal}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:Mythlore 121/122}}

[[Category:Mythlore]]