{{mythlore
|title=Mythlore 15
| image = Mythlore_15.gif
|editor=[[Glen GoodKnight]]
|publisher=[[Mythopoeic Society]]
|date=March [[1977]]
|format=Paperback
|pages=39
}}

'''''Mythlore'' 15''' ([https://dc.swosu.edu/mythlore/vol4/iss3/ Volume 4, Issue 3]) is an issue of the ''[[Mythlore]]'' journal, published by the [[Mythopoeic Society]].

==Contents ==

====Articles====

* Kocher, Paul. “The Tale of the Noldor.” 3-7.
* Skinner, Veronica L. “Guinevere’s Role in the Arthurian Poetry of Charles Williams.” 9-11.
* Brown, Judith. “The Pilgrimage from Deep Space.” 13-15.
* Howard, Andrew. “''Till We Have Faces'' and Its Mythological and Literary Precursors.” 30-32.

====Features====

* GoodKnight, Glen. Editorial Note. 11.
* McMenomy, Bruce. “Misconstruction.” Review of ''J.R.R. Tolkien: Architect of Middle-earth'' by Daniel Grotta-Kurska. 16-17.
* Patterson, Nancy-Lou. “Art in Words and Pictures.” Review of ''The Fantastic in Literature'' by Eric S. Rabkin. 17-18.
* Christopher, Joe R. “Poems.” Review of ''Feng: A Poem'' by John Wain, ''Wild Angels'' by Ursula K. Le Guin, and ''Aniara: A Review of Man in Time and Space'' by Harry Martinson. 18-20.
* GoodKnight, Glen. Editorial. 11+.
* GoodKnight, Glen. Some Photographs and Comments. 21+.
* Letters. 23+.
* Christopher, Joe R. “An Inklings Bibliography (4).” 33-38.
* ''Mythprint''. 39.

====Art====

* A.V.G.: 16
* Sarah Beach: 18, 19
* Bonnie GoodKnight: 2, 7, 20, 30, 31
* Glen GoodKnight Photographs: 21, 22
* Annette Harper: cover, 5
* Mary Hodge Calligraphy: 20
* Michael Kucharski: 26, 27
* R. Patrick McCabe: 17
* Bruce McMenomy: back cover, 8
* Thadara Ottobris: 24, 25
* Valerie Protopapas: 12
* Mike Workman: 20
* Cover: Annette Harper, “Feanor with Palantir”
* Page 5: Annette Harper, “The Death of Gil-Galad”
* Page 12: Valerie Protopapas, “Angelic Waterfall from ''The Great Divorce''”
{{mythlorenav|14|16}}

{{title|journal}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:Mythlore 015}}

[[Category:Mythlore]]