{{mythlore
|title=''Mythlore'' 107/108, Volume 28, Issue 1/2
| image = Mythlore 107 108.gif
|editor=[[Janet Brennan Croft]]
|publisher=[[Mythopoeic Society]]
|date=Fall/Winter [[2009]]
|format=Paperback
|pages=200
}}
'''''Mythlore'' 107/108''' ([https://dc.swosu.edu/mythlore/vol28/iss1/ Volume 28, Issue 1/2]) is an issue of the ''[[Mythlore]]'' journal, published by the [[Mythopoeic Society]].

==Contents==

====Articles====

* Harris, Jason Marc. "Perilous Shores: The Unfathomable Supernaturalism of Water in 19th-Century Scottish Folklore."
* Kinniburgh, Annie. "The Noldor and the Tuatha Dé Danaan: J.R.R. Tolkien's Irish Influences."
* Berube, Pierre H. "Tolkien's ''Sigurd & Gudrún'': Summary, Sources, & Analogs."
* Gorman, Anita G., and Leslie Robertson Mateer. "Amanda McKittrick Ros and the Inklings."
* Shaham, Inbar. "Ancient Myths in Contemporary Cinema: Oedipus Rex and Perceval the Knight of the Holy Grail in ''Pulp Fiction'' and ''The Sixth Sense''."
* Carroll, Shiloh. "The Heart of the Labyrinth: Reading Jim Henson's ''Labyrinth'' as a Modern Dream Vision."
* Miller, Jennifer L. "No Sex in Narnia? How Hans Christian Andersen's 'Snow Queen' Problematizes C.S. Lewis's ''The Chronicles of Narnia''."
* Emerson, David. "Innocence as a Super-power: Little Girls on the Hero's Journey."
* Croft, Janet Brennan. "Naming the Evil One: Onomastic Strategies in Tolkien and Rowling."

==== Features==== 

*Croft, Janet Brennan. Editorial.
*Letters: Ryder W. Miller.

====Reviews====

* ''Tales Before Narnia: The Roots of Modern Fantasy and Science Fiction.'' Ed. Douglas A. Anderson. Reviewed by John D. Rateliff.
* ''The Magician's Book: A Skeptic's Adventures In Narnia.'' Laura Miller. Reviewed by Joe R. Christopher.
* ''Projecting Tolkien's Musical Worlds: A Study of Musical Affect in Howard Shore's Soundtrack to Lord of the Rings.'' Matthew Young. Reviewed by Jason Fisher.
* ''Esotericism, Art, and Imagination.'' Eds. Arthur Versluis, Lee Irwin, John Richards, and Melinda Weinstein. Reviewed by Emily E. Auger.
* ''The Annotated Wind in the Willows.'' By Kenneth Grahame; introduction by Brian Jacques; edited with a preface and notes by Annie Gauger. Reviewed by Janet Brennan Croft.
* ''The Wind in the Willows: An Annotated Edition.'' By Kenneth Grahame; edited by Seth Lerer. Reviewed by Janet Brennan Croft.
* ''The Illustrators of The Wind in the Willows, 1908-2008.'' Carolyn Hares-Stryker. Reviewed by Janet Brennan Croft.
* ''Truths Breathed Through Silver: The Inklings' Moral and Mythopoeic Legacy.'' Ed. Jonathan B. Himes Joe R. Christopher, Salwa Khoddam. Reviewed by John D. Rateliff.
* ''Tolkien Studies: An Annual Scholarly Review.'' Volume vi. Edited by Douglas A. Anderson, Michael D.C. Drout, and Verlyn Flieger. Reviewed by Janet Brennan Croft.
{{mythlorenav|105/106|109/110}}
{{title|journal}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:Mythlore 107/108}}

[[Category:Mythlore]]