{{mythlore
|title=Mythlore 7
| image = Mythlore_7.gif
|editor=[[Glen GoodKnight]]
|publisher=[[Mythopoeic Society]]
|date=Winter [[1971]]
|format=Paperback
|pages=27
}}

'''''Mythlore'' 7''' ([https://dc.swosu.edu/mythlore/vol2/iss3/ Volume 2, Issue 3])  is an issue of the ''[[Mythlore]]'' journal, published by the [[Mythopoeic Society]].

== Contents ==

====Features====

* GoodKnight, Glen. The Voice of Tash. 3.
* GoodKnight, Glen. World of Fanzines. 8.
* Zuber, Bernie. Across the Brandywine. 11.
* Missive to Mythlore. 27.
* GoodKnight, Glen. Editorial: "Lewis, Power, and Science." 27.

====Articles====

* Marmor, Paula. "An Etymological Excursion among the Shire Folk." 4.
* Hannay, Margaret P. "Orual: The Search for Justice." 5-6.
* Masson, Keith. "Tom Bombadil: A Critical Essay." 7-8.
* Howard, Claire. "The Vented Spleen." Review of ''J.R.R. Tolkien'' by Catharine R. Stimpson. 9-11.
* Christopher, Joe R. "An Introduction to Narnia, Part 2: The Geography of the Chronicles." 12-16, 27.
* Mythcon Reports. 23+.
* Christopher, Joe R. "In the C.S. Lewis Tradition: Two Short Stories by Anthony Boucher." 25.

====Fiction====

*Williams, Charles. "The Noises That Weren't There. Chapter 2: The Voice of the Rat." 17-23.

====Poetry====

* Williams, Charles. "Ballade of a Street Door." 18.
* Peoples, Galen. "Lilith, Out of Heaven." 19.

====Art====

* Alpajpuri: 19
* Bonnie Bergstrom: cover, 3, 5, 8, 17, 20, 22, 26
* Davidson: 9, 10
* Tim Kirk: 4, 12, 13, 14, 15
* Steve McIntosh: 27
* Paula Marmor: 11, back cover
* Diana Paxson: 25
* Joe Pearson: 10
* Don Smith: 11
* Bernie Zuber: 7, 23
* Cover: Bonnie Bergstrom, "Now we were before it and I could see the story it told" from ''Till We Have Faces'' by C.S. Lewis
* Back Cover: Paula Marmor, "Castamir the Usurper"
{{mythlorenav|6|8}}
{{title|journal}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:Mythlore 007}}
[[Category:Mythlore]]