{{mythlore
|title=Mythlore 41
| image = Mythlore 41.png
|editor=[[Glen GoodKnight]]
|publisher=[[Mythopoeic Society]]
|date=Winter/Spring [[1985]]
|format=Paperback
|pages=63
|}}
'''''Mythlore'' 41''' ([https://dc.swosu.edu/mythlore/vol11/iss3/ Volume 11, Issue 3]) is an issue of the ''[[Mythlore]]'' journal, published by the [[Mythopoeic Society]].

==Contents==

====Articles====

* Yolen, Jane. “The Wood Between the Worlds.”
* Schorr, Karl. “The Rewards of Reading Fantasy.”
* Hollwitz, John. “The Wonder of Passage, The Making of Gold: Alchemy and Initiation in Out of the Silent Planet.”
* Stolzenbach, Mary M. “Machen's Hallows.”
* Bullock, Richard P. “The Importance of Free Will in The Lord of the Rings.”
* Carter, M. L. “The Psychological Symbolism of the Magic Fountain and the Giant Herdsman in Yvain.”
* Zimmerman, Manfred. “Miscellaneous Remarks On Gimli and On Rhythmic Prose.”
* Hall, Robert A., Jr. “Who is The Master of The "Precious"?”
* Lowentrout, Peter. “The Rags of Lordship: Science Fiction, Fantasy, and the Reenchantment of the World.”
* Myers, Doris T. “C.S. Lewis' Passages: Chronological Age and Spiritual Development in Narnia.”
* Thompson, George H. “Early Review of Books by J.R.R. Tolkien - Part II.”

==== Poetry ====

* Rawls, Melanie. “The Wood Between the Worlds.”
* Berman, Ruth. “Radagast in Middle-earth.”

==== Features ====

* GoodKnight, Glen H. Editorial: The Procrustean Bed of Film Animation.
* Speth, Lee. “Cavalier Treatment.”
* Beach, Sarah. “Mythopoesis.”
* Hyde, Paul Nolan. “Quenti Lambardillion: Tolkien's Linguistic Aesthetic.”
* Letters.

==== Reviews ====

* ''J.R.R. Tolkien - Myth, Morality and Religion.'' Richard L. Purtill. Reviewed by Nancy-Lou Patterson.
* ''Love All / Busman's Honeymoon.'' Dorothy L. Sayers and Muriel St. Clare Byrne. Reviewed by Nancy-Lou Patterson.
* ''The Terminator.'' Direc. by James Cameron. Reviewed by Benjamin Urrutia.
* ''Fantasists on Fantasy.'' Robert H. Boyer and Kenneth J. Zahorski. Reviewed by Mabel Drew.
{{mythlorenav|40|42}}
{{title|journal}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:Mythlore 041}}

[[Category:Mythlore]]