{{mythlore
|title=''Mythlore'' 70, Volume 18, Issue 4
| image = Mythlore 70.png
|editor=[[Glen GoodKnight]]
|publisher=[[Mythopoeic Society]]
|date=Autumn [[1992]]
|format=Paperback
|pages=67
}}
'''''Mythlore'' 70''' ([https://dc.swosu.edu/mythlore/vol18/iss4/ Volume 18, Issue 4]) is an issue of the ''[[Mythlore]]'' journal, published by the [[Mythopoeic Society]].

A "Letter" from [[Carl F. Hostetter]] is a response to the article "[[Gondolinic Runes]]" by [[Paul Nolan Hyde]] published in [[Mythlore 69|''Mythlore'' 69]].<ref>[http://www.tolkienbooks.net/php/languages.php Languages and Alphabets] at [http://www.tolkienbooks.net Tolkienbooks.net] (accessed 27 August 2011)</ref>

==Contents==

====Articles====

* Stoddard, William H. “Law and Institutions in the Shire.”
* Kollmann, Judith. “''Eros, Philia,'' and ''Agape'' in Charles Williams' Arthuriad.”
* Herrick, Jim. “C.S. Lewis and Narrative Argument in ''Out of the Silent Planet''.”
* Hood, Gwenyth E., Dainis Bisenieks, Stephen Linhart, Gary Hunnewell, Tim Callahan, Edna Montemayor, John L. Leland, and Paul Nolan Hyde. “Tributes to J.R.R. Tolkien.”
* Senior, William. “Donaldson and Tolkien.”
* Venhecke, Johan. “Tolkien in Dutch: A Study of the Reception of Tolkien's Work in Belgium and the Netherlands.”
* Payne, Craig. “The Cycle of the Zodiac in John Gardener's ''Grendel''.”

==== Poetry ====

* Paxson, Diana L. “The Baby and The Bird.”

====Features====

* GoodKnight, Glen H. Editorial Introduction: In This Issue.
* Callahan, Bg, and Glen GoodKnight. “Pictures from the Tolkien Centenary Conference.”
* Christopher, Joe R., and Wayne G. Hammond. An Inklings Bibliography (47).
* Kondratiev, Alexei. “Tales Newly Told.”
* Letters.
* DiSante, Paula, Nancy-Lou Patterson, and Denis Gordeyev. “Artists' Comments.”

====Reviews====

* ''Charles Williams.'' David Llewellyn Dodds. Reviewed by Nancy-Lou Patterson.
* ''Fish Soup''. Ursula K. LeGuin, Illus. by Patrick Wynne. Reviewed by Glen GoodKnight.
* ''J.R.R. Tolkien: Life and Legend''. ''An Exhibition to Commemorate the Centenary of the Birth of J.R.R. Tolkien.'' Intro. Judith Priestman. Reviewed by Glen GoodKnight.
* ''The 1993 Tolkien Calendar.'' Illust. by Alan Lee. Reviewed by Glen GoodKnight.
* ''The C.S. Lewis Handbook.'' Colin Duriez. Reviewed by Nancy-Lou Patterson.
* ''All My Road Before Me: The Diary of C.S. Lewis.'' C.S. Lewis. Reviewed by Nancy-Lou Patterson.
{{mythlorenav|69|71}}
{{references}}
{{title|journal}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:Mythlore 070}}

[[Category:Mythlore]]