{{mythlore
|title=Mythlore 30
| image = Mythlore 30.png
|editor=[[Glen GoodKnight]]
|publisher=[[Mythopoeic Society]]
|date=[[1982]] Winter
|format=Paperback
|pages=47
}}
'''''Mythlore'' 30''' ([https://dc.swosu.edu/mythlore/vol8/iss4/ Volume 8, Issue 4]) is an issue of the ''[[Mythlore]]'' journal, published by the [[Mythopoeic Society]].

==Contents==

====Articles====

* Pitts, Mary Ellen. "Motif of the Garden in the Novels of Tolkien, Williams and Lewis."
*Gillespie, Gerald V. "The Irish Mythological Cycle and Tolkien's Eldar."
*Carter, M.L. "The Cosmic Gospel, C.S. Lewis and L'Engle."
*Zimmermann, Manfred. "Early Glimpses of Middle-Earth."
*Moss, Anita. "Felicitious Space in the Fantasies of George MacDoanld and Mervyn Peake."
*Beare, Rhona. "Charles Williams and the Angelicals."
*Knapp, Bettina. "A Jungian Reading of The Kalevala 500-1300, Finnish Shamanism."
*Roberts, Teresa Noelle. "The Unicorn, Creature of Love"

====Features====

*GoodKnight, Glen H. Editorial: Changing the Possible...
*Speth, Lee. "Cavalier Treatment: The Years in Broceliande."
*Ellwood, Gracia Fay. "Matters of Grave Import: The Third Heaven."
*Christopher, Joe R. "An Inklings Bibliography."
*Letters.

====Reviews====

* McGillis, Roderick. Review of Prickett, Stephen. ''Victorian Fantasy''.
* Patterson, Nancy-Lou. Review of Mathews, Richard. ''Worlds Beyond the World: The Fantastic Vision of William Morris''.
* Patterson, Nancy-Lou. Review of Brabazon, James.  ''Dorothy L. Sayers: The Life of a Courageous Woman.''
* Patterson, Nancy-Lou. Review of Smith, Robert Houston. ''Patches of Godlight: The Pattern of Thought in C.S. Lewis.''
* Patterson, Nancy-Lou. Review of Isaacs, Neil D. and Rose A. Zimbardo, ed. ''Tolkien: New Critical Perspectives.'' 
* Patterson, Nancy-Lou. Review of Strachey, Barbara.  ''Journeys of Frodo: An Atlas of J.R.R. Tolkien's The Lord of the Rings.''
* Colvin, George W.  Review of Llwelyn, Morgan.  ''Lion of Ireland: The Legend of Brian Boru.''
* Egan, Thomas M.  Review of Fonstad, Karen Wynn.  ''The Atlas of Middle-Earth.''

====Poems====

*Allaby, Mark. "Tree and Leaf."
*Christopher, J.R. "Bilbo's Journey."
*Christopher, J.R. "Ents."
*Roberts, Teresa Noelle. "Unicorns."
{{mythlorenav|29|31}}
{{title|journal}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:Mythlore 030}}

[[Category:Mythlore]]