{{mythlore
|title=''Mythlore'' 47, Volume 13, Issue 1
| image = Mythlore 47.png
|editor=[[Glen GoodKnight]]
|publisher=[[Mythopoeic Society]]
|date=Autumn [[1986]]
|format=Paperback
|pages=63
}}
'''''Mythlore'' 47''' ([https://dc.swosu.edu/mythlore/vol13/iss1/ Volume 13, Issue 1]) is an issue of the ''[[Mythlore]]'' journal, published by the [[Mythopoeic Society]]. The issue includes a subject index to the ''[[Tolkien Journal]]''.
== Contents==

==== Articles ====

* Reynolds, George. “Dante and Williams: Pilgrims in Purgatory.”
* Patterson, Nancy-Lou. “‘Some Kind of Company’: The Sacred Community in That Hideous Strength.”
* Hargrove, Gene. “Who is Tom Bombadil?”
* Farrell, Eleanor. “The Epic Hero and Society: Cuchulainn, Beowulf, and Roland.”
* An Interview with Jane Yolen
* Lutton, Jeannette Hume. “The Feast of Reason: Out of the Silent Planet as The Book of Hnau.”
* Thompson, George H. “Early Review of Books by J.R.R. Tolkien: Part VI – VIII.”

==== Features ====

* GoodKnight, Glen H. Editor's Notes.
* Reynolds, Trevor. Subject Index to The Tolkien Journal.
* Christopher, Joe R. An Inklings Bibliography (30).
* Beach, Sarah. “Mythopoesis.”
* Hyde, Paul Nolan. “Quenti Lambardillion.”
* Kondratiev, Alexei. “Tales Newly Told.”

==== Reviews ====

* ''The Politics of Fantasy: C.S. Lewis and J.R.R. Tolkien.'' Lee D. Rossi. Reviewed by David Bratman.
* ''Shadowlands: The Story of C.S. Lewis and Joy Davidman.'' Brian Sibley. Reviewed by Nancy-Lou Patterson.
* ''The Silver Trumpet.'' Owen Barfield. Reviewed by Nancy-Lou Patterson.
* ''The Grand Miracle and Other Essays on Theology and Ethics from God in the Dock.'' C.S. Lewis. Reviewed by Nancy-Lou Patterson.
* ''First and Second Things: Essays on Theology and Ethics.'' C.S. Lewis. Reviewed by Nancy-Lou Patterson.
* ''The Art of G.K. Chesterton.'' Alzina Stone Dale. Reviewed by Nancy-Lou Patterson.
* ''The Lord Peter Wimsey Companion.'' Stephan P. Clarke. Reviewed by Nancy-Lou Patterson.
* ''The Great Mouse Detective.'' A Walt Disney animated film. Reviewed by Benjamin Urrutia.
{{mythlorenav|46|48}}
{{title|journal}}

{{DEFAULTSORT:Mythlore 047}}

[[Category:Mythlore]]