{{mythlore
|title=''Mythlore'' 123, Volume 32, Issue 1
| image = Mythlore 123.gif
|editor=[[Janet Brennan Croft]]
|publisher=[[Mythopoeic Society]]
|date=Fall/Winter [[2013]]
|format=Paperback
|pages=184
}}
'''''Mythlore'' 123''' ([https://dc.swosu.edu/mythlore/vol32/iss1/ Volume 32, Issue 1]) is an issue of the ''[[Mythlore]]'' journal, published by the [[Mythopoeic Society]].

==Contents==

====Articles====

* Anderson, Douglas A. "Fairy Elements in British Literary Writings in the Decade Following the Cottingley Fair Photographs Episode."
* Flieger, Verlyn. "How Trees Behave-Or Do They?"
* Steem, Cara-Joy. "Listening as Heroic Action in L'Engle's ''A Swiftly Tilting Planet''."
* Abrahamson, Megan B. "J.R.R. Tolkien, Fanfiction, and 'The Freedom of the Reader'."
* Livingston, Michael. "Troy and the Rings: Tolkien and the Medieval Myth of England."
* McGregor, Jamie. "Tolkien's Devices: The Heraldy of Middle-Earth."
* Madsen, Catherine. "Theological Reticence and Moral Radiance: Notes on Tolkien, Levinas, and Inuit Cosmology."
* Swank, Kris. "''The Hobbit'' and ''The Father Christmas Letters''."

==== Features ====  

* Croft, Janet Brennan. Editorial.

====Reviews====

* ''The International Relations of Middle-earth: Learning from The Lord of the Rings.'' Abigail E. Ruane and Patrick James. Reviewed by Robert T. Tally Jr.
* ''Moments of Grace and Spiritual Warfare in The Lord of the Rings.'' Anne Marie Gazzolo. Reviewed by Damien Bador.
* ''The Wizard of Oz as American Myth: A Critical Study of Six Versions of the Story, 1900-2007.'' Alissa Burger. Reviewed by Hugh H. Davis.
* ''Plain to the Inward Eye: Selected Essays on C.S. Lewis.'' Don W. King. Reviewed by Holly Ordway.
* ''Tolkien's Poetry.'' Ed. Julian Eilmann and Allan Turner. Reviewed by Joe R. Christopher.
* ''The Lion's World: A Journey into the Heart of Narnia.'' Rowan Williams. Reviewed by Melody Green.
* ''C. S. Lewis - A Life: Eccentric Genius, Reluctant Prophet.'' Alister McGrath. Reviewed by Gregory Bassham.
* ''Seven: An Anglo-American Literary Review.'' Ed. Marjorie Lamp Mead. Reviewed by Janet Brennan Croft.
* ''Supernatural Studies: Official Publication of the Supernatural Studies Association.'' Ed. Margo Collins and Deborah Christie. Reviewed by Janet Brennan Croft.
* ''Fastitocalon: Studies in Fantasticism Ancient to Modern.'' Ed. Thomas Honegger and Fanfan Chen. Reviewed by Janet Brennan Croft.
* ''Wormwood: Literature of the Fantastic, Supernatural and Decadent.'' Edited by Mark Valentine. Reviewed by Janet Brennan Croft.
{{mythlorenav|121/122|124}}
{{title|journal}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:Mythlore 123}}

[[Category:Mythlore]]