{{mythlore
|title=Mythlore 36
| image = Mythlore 36.png
|editor=[[Glen GoodKnight]]
|publisher=[[Mythopoeic Society]]
|date=Summer [[1983]]
|format=Paperback
|pages=55
}}
'''''Mythlore'' 36''' ([https://dc.swosu.edu/mythlore/vol10/iss2/ Volume 10, Issue 2]) is an issue of the ''[[Mythlore]]'' journal, published by the [[Mythopoeic Society]].

==Contents ==

====Articles====

* Crowe, Edith. “The Many Faces of Herosim in Tolkien.”
* Pitts, M. E. “Ways of Passage: An Approach to Descent Into Hell.”
* Manganiello, Dominic. “The Artist as Magician: Yeats, Joyce, and Tolkien.”
* Schoor, Karl. “The Nature of Dreams in The Lord of the Rings.”
* Boeing, Robert. “C.S. Lewis' The Great Divorce and the Medieval Dream Vision.”
* Kondratiev, Alex. “New Myths for Old, Part II.”

==== Poetry ====

* DuPriest, Travis. “Some 17th Century Worthies: A Short Verse Series.”
* Christopher, Joe R. “Margaret Anstruther's Vision.”
* Kenny, Alice P. “The Toad-Sister.”
* Neighbors, Jim. “Once Queen Susan.”
* Rusa, Karla. “October Hymn.”

==== Features ====

* GoodKnight, Glen. Editorial.
* Christopher, Joe R. Inklings' Bibliography (25)
* Hyde, Paul Nolan. “Quenti Lambardillion.”
* Beach, Sarah. “Mythopoesis.”
* Speth, Lee. “Cavalier Treatment.”
* Letters.

==== Reviews ====

* ''Studies in the Literary Imagination. Vol. XIV, No. 2. Fall, 1981''. Georgia State University. Ed. by Rayond Carter Sutherland. Reviewed by Nancy-Lou Patterson.
* ''The Mists of Avalon''. Marion Zimmer Bradley. Reviewed by Benjamin Urrutia.
* ''The Harmony Within: The Spiritual Vision of George MacDonald''. Rolland Hein. Reviewed by Roderick McGillis.
* ''C.S. Lewis and the Church of Rome''. Christopher Derrick. Reviewed by Lee Speth.
* ''Between Heaven and Hell.'' Peter Kreeft. Reviewed by Nancy-Lou Patterson.
{{mythlorenav|35|37}}
{{title|journal}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:Mythlore 036}}

[[Category:Mythlore]]