{{mythlore
|title=Mythlore 4
| image = Mythlore_4.gif
|editor=[[Glen GoodKnight]]
|publisher=[[Mythopoeic Society]]
|date=October, [[1969]]
|format=Paperback
|pages=58
}}

'''''Mythlore''''' 4 [https://dc.swosu.edu/mythlore/vol1/iss4/ (Volume 1, Issue 4)] is an issue of the ''[[Mythlore]]'' journal, published by the [[Mythopoeic Society]].

== Contents ==

=== Articles ===

* Kuhl, Rand. "Owen Barfield in Southern California." 8+.
* Hannay, Margaret P. "The Mythology of ''Out of the Silent Planet''." 11-14.
* Ring, David. "Report on Westercon XXII." 15+.
* Carnell, Corbin. "C.S. Lewis: An Appraisal." 18+.
* "Bilbo and Frodo's Birthday Party, reported by Elrond Peredhil." 21.
* Juhren, Marcella. "Mileage in Middle Earth." 22.
* McMenomy, Bruce. "Song of Joy." 41+.
* Wilson, Simone. "The Empire of Charles Williams." 50-53. 

=== Features ===

* GoodKnight, Glen. "The Council of Elrond." 2+.
* Zuber, Bernie. "Across the Brandywine." 4+.
* Ballif, Sandra. "A Sindarin-Quenya Dictionary, More or Less, Listing All Elvish Words Found in ''The Lord of the Rings'', ''The Hobbit'', and ''The Road Goes Ever On'' by J.R.R. Tolkien (Part 3)." 23-26.
* "Missives to Mythlore." 27+.
* Zuber, Bernie. "World of Fanzines." 38+.
* Kuhl, Rand. "Lore of Logres: Arrows from a Twisted Bow: Misunderstanding Tolkien." Review of ''Understanding Tolkien and The Lord of the Rings'' by William Ready." 45-49.
* Editorial: "Chronlogical Snobbery." 56+.

=== Art ===

* Alpajpuri: 35 (lettering: 4, 15, 22, 45, 50, 56)
* George Barr: 7, 14, 42, 44, 53, 55
* Bonnie Bergstrom: cover, 2, 8, 16, 22, 29, 30, 33, 34, 36, 37, 58
* Ron Cobb: 20
* Katherine Cribbs: back cover
* Dick Flinchbaugh: 28
* Rudy Haigopian: 37
* Tim Kirk: 11, 12, 13, 27, 30, 35, 51, 56
* Bruce McMenomy: 3, 23, 54, 55 (lettering: 17)
* Bernie Zuber: 5, 21, 31, 32, 40
* Cover: Bonnie Bergstrom, "Leaf by Niggle"
* Back Cover: Katherine Cribbs, "Thrain II after Moria"
{{mythlorenav|3|5}}

{{title|journal}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:Mythlore 004}}
[[Category:Mythlore]]