{{mythlore
|title=''Mythlore'' 60, Volume 16, Issue 2
| image = Mythlore 60.jpg
|editor=[[Glen GoodKnight]]
|publisher=[[Mythopoeic Society]]
|date=Winter [[1989]]
|format=Paperback
|pages=67
}}
'''''Mythlore'' 60''' ([https://dc.swosu.edu/mythlore/vol16/iss2/ Volume 16, Issue 2]) is an issue of the ''[[Mythlore]]'' journal, published by the [[Mythopoeic Society]] and featuring a cover illustration by [[Nancy-Lou Patterson]].

The article 'Among the Trees: Seeking the Spirit of Narqelion' by [[Paul Nolan Hyde]] includes the text of [[J.R.R. Tolkien]]'s poem '[[Narqelion]]' and an English translation, along with several early Tolkien poems. A summary of the article by [[Jorge Quiñónez]], including the text of the poem and an English translation, was published in ''[[Vinyar Tengwar]]'' [[Vinyar Tengwar 12|Issue 12]], July 1990.<ref>''An Illustrated Tolkien Bibliography'' at Tolkienbooks.net</ref>

==Contents==

====Articles====

* Startzman, L. Eugene. “Goldberry and Galadriel: The Quality of Joy.”
* Loney, Douglas. “Humpty Dumpty in the Heavens: Perspective in ''Out of the Silent Planet''.”
* Beach, Sarah, Patrick Wynne, and Paula DiSante. “Three Artistic Versions of ‘The Death of Glorfindel’.”
* Enright, Nancy. “Charles Williams and his Theology of Romantic Love: A Dantean Interpretation of the Christian Doctrines of the Incarnation and the Trinity.”
* Murphy, Patrick D. “The High and Low Fantasies of Feminist (Re)Mythopoeia.”
* O'Brien, Donald. “On the Origin of the Name ‘Hobbit’.”
* Abbott, Joe. “Tolkien's Monsters: Concept and Function in ''The Lord of the Rings'' (Part II): Shelob the Great.”
* Bucknall, Barbara J. “Rilke and Le Guin.”

====Features====

* GoodKnight, Glen H. Editorial Introduction: Fantasy and Personal Involvement.
* Christopher, Joe R., Wayne G. Hammond, and Pat Allen Hargis. An Inklings Bibliography (37).
* Hyde, Paul Nolan. “Quenti Lambardillion: Among the Trees: Seeking the Spirit of Narqelion.”
* Letters.

====Reviews====

* ''The Treason of Isengard: The History of the Lord of the Rings, Part Two.'' J.R.R. Tolkien. Reviewed by Glen GoodKnight.
* ''Sold Into Egypt.'' Madeleine L'Engle. Reviewed by Nancy-Lou Patterson.
* ''The Vampire in Literature: A Critical Bibliography.'' Margaret Carter. Reviewed by Joe R. Christopher.
* ''Payer of Tribute.'' Margaret Carter. Reviewed by Joe R. Christopher.
{{mythlorenav|59|61}}
{{references}}
{{title|journal}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:Mythlore 060}}
[[Category:Publications with contribution by J.R.R. Tolkien]]
[[Category:Mythlore]]