{{mythlore
|title=Mythlore 23
| image = Mythlore 23.gif
|editor=Gracia Fay Ellwood
|publisher=[[Mythopoeic Society]]
|date=Winter [[1982]]
|format=Paperback
|pages=47
}}
'''''Mythlore'' 23''' ([https://dc.swosu.edu/mythlore/vol7/iss1/ Volume 7, Issue 1]) is an issue of the [[Mythlore]] journal, published by the [[Mythopoeic Society]].

==Contents==

====Articles====

* Marchesani, Diane. "Tolkien's Lore: The Songs of Middle-Earth." 3-5.
* Dowdy, David. "The Figure of Taliessin." 6-13.
* Neuleib, Janice. "Love's Alchemy: Jane in That Hideous Strength." 16-17, 19.
* Howard, Thomas. "The Uses of Myth." 20-23, 35.
* Sammons, Martha C. "Christian Doctrines 'Transposed' in C.S. Lewis' Till We Have Faces." 31-35.

====Features====

* Speth, Lee. "Cavalier Treatment: Questions of Taste." Review of ''The Life of Brian'' (movie). Hooper, Walter. ''They Stand Together''. 14-15.
* Smith, Christine. Mythcon Report. 15.
* Ellwood, Gracia Fay. Editorial. 18+.
* Letters. 36+.
* GoodKnight, Glen. Founder's Focus. 40.
* Christopher, Joe R. "An Inklings Bibliography (12)." 41-45.

====Reviews====

* Patterson, Nancy-Lou. "The Heirarchy of Light." Review of Hillegas, March R., ed. ''Shadows of Imagination: The Fantasies of C.S. Lewis, J.R.R. Tolkien, and Charles Williams''. 24.
* Patterson, Nancy-Lou. "Evoking Wonder." Review of ''Manlove, C.N. Modern Fantasy -- Five Studies.'' 24-25.
* Speth, Lee. "The Perfect Place." Review of Baum, L. Frank. ''Oz'' series (Del Rey reprints). 25-26.
* Patterson, Nancy-Lou. "Neither Confounding the Persons." Review of Payne, Leanne. ''Real Presence: The Holy Spirit in the Works of C.S. Lewis''. 26-27.
* Patterson, Nancy-Lou. "Past Watchful Dragons." Review of Hooper, Walter. ''Past Watchful Dragons''. 28-29.
* Patterson, Nancy-Lou. "They Stand Together." Review of Lewis, C.S. ''They Stand Together: The Letters of C.S. Lewis to Arthur Greeves.'' 29-30.

==== Poems ====

* Christopher, Joe R. "Dorothy L. Sayers at Fifty." 40.
* Berman, Ruth. "Robin's Summonses." 47.

====Art====

* Lisa Cowan: 34
* Edith Crowe: Front Cover
* Beryl de Folo: 21, 22, 23
* Louis Dwarshuis: 27
* Melodie Grandy: 37
* Mary Janis Johnson: Front Cover
* Michael Logan: 47
* Thadara Ottobris: 8, 9, 10, Back Cover
* Annalee Peoples: 5, 11, 19
* John Pivovarnick: 32
* Kevin S.: 45
{{mythlorenav|22|24}}
{{title|journal}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:Mythlore 023}}

[[Category:Mythlore]]