{{disambig-more|Nar|[[Nár (disambiguation)]]}}
{{infobox character
| people=[[Dwarves|Dwarf]]
| name=Nar
| image=
| caption=
| pronun=
| othernames=
| titles=
| position=
| location=
| affiliation=
| language=
| birth=[[Third Age]]
| birthlocation=
| rule=
| death=
| deathlocation=
| age=
| notablefor=
| house=
| parentage=
| siblings=
| spouse=
| children=
| gender=Male
| height=
| hair=
| eyes=
| clothing=
| weapons=
| steed=
}}
{{quote|What fun to be off again, off on the Road with dwarves! This is what I have really been longing for, for years! Goodbye!|[[Bilbo Baggins]]}}

'''Nar''' was one of the [[Dwarves]] that helped [[Bilbo Baggins]] on the preparations for his [[Bilbo's Farewell Party|big birthday feast]].

== History ==
Bilbo had ordered presents from [[Erebor]] and [[Dale]],<ref group=note>As such, Nar and his companions are probably [[Dwarves of Erebor]].</ref> and in [[September]] dwarves with long beards and deep hoods driving a wagon came to [[Hobbiton]]. Some of them, stayed in [[Bag End]] for the following days doing preparations.

After Bilbo's disappearance trick, he returned invisible to Bag End while dwarves were doing work in various rooms, packing and labelling Bilbo's farewell presents. Bilbo took his stuff and had a quarrel with Gandalf about leaving [[One Ring|his magic ring]] behind. After the dialogue, Bilbo whistled and Nar, [[Anar (dwarf)|Anar]] and [[Hannar]], came and said that everything was ready and labelled. Then they took off.<ref>{{FR|Party}}</ref>

== Other versions of the legendarium ==
The names of Nar, Anar and Hannar appear in the early writings of the chapter "[[A Long-expected Party]]", where Nar was given some dialogue and a bit more development.  However, [[J.R.R. Tolkien|Tolkien]] later changed his mind, and did not disclose their names in the published book nor gave him any dialogue; the name [[Nár]] was given to a different dwarf in the final work. 

In that early text also, except the three dwarves who accompanied Bilbo, there was a fourth dwarf, [[Lofar]], who stayed behind, but there is no trace or mention of him in the published book.<ref>{{RS|Return}}</ref>

== Etymology ==
''Nár'' is a dwarf from the ''[[Völuspá|Dvergatal]]''. His name means "Corpse".<ref>Chester Nathan Gould, "Dwarf-Names: A Study in Old Icelandic Religion", published in ''Publications of the Modern Language Association of America'', Vol 44 (1929), issue #4, pp. 939-967</ref>

{{references|note}}
{{title}}
[[Category:Dwarves]]
[[Category:Norse names]]
[[Category:Third Age characters]]