{{Album
| title = Nightfall in Middle-Earth
| image = Blind guardian nightfall cover.jpg
| type = Studio album
| artist = [[Blind Guardian]]
| released = 28 April 1998
| recorded = July 1997 – January 1998
| genre = Metal
| length = 65:29
| language = English
| label = Virgin/Century Media
}}

'''''Nightfall in Middle-Earth''''' is an album by [[Blind Guardian]] that was released in [[1998]].

The album is a concept album based on the [[J.R.R. Tolkien]] book ''[[The Silmarillion]]''. Many of the tracks from the album are not complete songs, but are merely narratives to further the story. Blind Guardian owes many of its lyrics to Tolkien's work, but this album is exclusively dedicated to ''The Silmarillion''. The lyrics range from the quest for the [[Silmarils]] until the dawn of the [[Third Age]].

"Nightfall in Middle-Earth" was the first album Blind Guardian released in the United States. The result was so positive that Century Media started to release old Blind Guardian hits in the U.S. (records such as "Follow the Blind" and "Battalions of Fear").{{fact}}

The track "Mirror Mirror" is included in ''Blind DVD: Imaginations Through The Looking Glass''. This DVD was rated by many different music-specialized sites as "a masterpiece".{{fact}}

==Lineup==
*Vocals: [[Hansi Kürsch]]
*Lead Guitar: André Olbrich
*Rhythm Guitar: Marcus Siepen
*Drums: Thomas "Thomen" Stauch

==Guests==
*Bass: Oliver Holzwarth
*Keyboards: Mathias Weisner
*Piano: Michael Schuren
*Flute: Max Zelner
*Narrators: Norman Eshley, Douglas Fielding

==Track listing==
#[[War of Wrath (song)|War of Wrath]] - ''1:50''
#[[Into the Storm]] - ''4:24''
#[[Lammoth (song)|Lammoth]] - ''0:28''
#[[Nightfall]] - ''5:34''
#[[The Minstrel]] - ''0:32''
#[[The Curse of Fëanor]] - ''5:41''
#[[Captured]] - ''0:26''
#[[Blood Tears]] - ''5:23''
#[[Mirror Mirror]] - ''5:07''
#[[Face the Truth]] - ''0:24''
#[[Noldor (Dead Winter Reigns)]] - ''6:51''
#[[Battle of Sudden Flame (song)|Battle of Sudden Flame]] - ''0:44''
#[[Time Stands Still (at the Iron Hill)]] - ''4:53''
#[[The Dark Elf]] - ''0:23''
#[[Thorn (song)|Thorn]] - ''6:18''
#[[The Eldar]] - ''3:39''
#[[Nom the Wise]] - ''0:33''
#[[When Sorrow Sang]] - ''4:25''
#[[Out on the Water]] - ''0:44''
#[[The Steadfast (song)|The Steadfast]] - ''0:21''
#[[A Dark Passage]] - ''6:01''
#[[Final Chapter (Thus Ends...)]] - ''0:48''

*Japanese Edition Bonus Tracks<ref>https://www.discogs.com/release/1926153 "Blind Guardian = ブラインド・ガーディアン* – Nightfall In Middle-Earth = ナイトフォール・イン・ミドル・アース" - 1998 Japanese Release</ref>

#Nightfall (Orchestral Version) - 5:40
#A Dark Passage (Instrumental Version) - 6.26

*2007 Edition Bonus Tracks<ref>https://www.discogs.com/release/1275617 "Blind Guardian – Nightfall In Middle-Earth" - 2007 Reissue</ref>

#[[Harvest of Sorrow]] - 3.40

*2018 Edition Bonus Tracks<ref>https://www.discogs.com/release/12873389 "Blind Guardian – Nightfall In Middle-Earth - 2018 Reissue</ref>

#Doom - 5:54
#Harvest of Sorrow - 3:40
#The Tides of War - 5:20

==Thematic references==
#In ''"War of Wrath"'', [[Sauron]] advises his master [[Morgoth]] to flee the triumphant [[Valar]] in the [[War of Wrath]].<ref name="S|24">{{S|24}}</ref> Morgoth sends him away and reflects on the events leading up to his defeat.
#In ''"Into the Storm"'', Morgoth and [[Ungoliant]], fleeing from [[Valinor]] after having destroyed the [[Two Trees]],<ref>{{S|8}}</ref> struggle for the possession of the [[Silmarils]].
#''"Lammoth"'' is the scream of Morgoth after being attacked by Ungoliant in [[Lammoth]].<ref name=":0">{{S|9}}</ref>
#In ''"Nightfall"'', [[Fëanor]] and his [[Sons of Fëanor|Seven Sons]] mourn the destruction wrought by Morgoth, including the slaying of [[Finwë]], Fëanor's father, and swear to get revenge on him, in spite to the Valar's disapproval.<ref name=":0" />
#''"The Minstrel"'' is most likely about [[Maglor]], son of Fëanor, who composed the song "[[Noldolantë]]".
#In ''"The Curse of Fëanor"'', Fëanor expresses his wrath and anger and relates the misdeeds he commits, especially the [[First Kinslaying|Kinslaying]], in pursuit of Morgoth.<ref name=":0" />
#In ''"Captured"'', Morgoth addresses the captive [[Maedhros]], Fëanor's son, and chains him to the [[Thangorodrim]] mountains.<ref name=":1">{{S|13}}</ref>
#In ''"Blood Tears"'', Maedhros relates the horrors of his captivity and his deliverance by [[Fingon]].<ref name=":1" />
#''"Mirror Mirror"'' recounts how [[Turgon]], in view of inevitable defeat, builds the city of [[Gondolin]], aided by [[Ulmo]] ("The Lord of Water").<ref name=":1" />
#In ''"Face the Truth"'', [[Fingolfin]] reflects about the destiny of the [[Noldor]].
#In ''"Noldor (Dead Winter Reigns)"'', [[Mandos]] issues the [[Doom of Mandos]] after the [[Kinslaying at Alqualondë|Kinslaying]] at [[Alqualondë]], and Fingolfin recounts his Noldor army's passage from the icy waste of [[Helcaraxë]] and the [[Prophecy of the North]] about the Noldor's fate; he reflects on his own and his people's guilt and foreshadows their ultimate defeat.<ref name=":0" />
#''"The Battle of Sudden Flame"'' talks about the [[Dagor Bragollach]], in which Morgoth breaks the [[Siege of Angband]] using his [[Balrogs]] and [[Dragons]].<ref name=":2">{{S|18}}</ref>
#''"Time Stands Still (At the Iron Hill)"'' is about Fingolfin riding to the gates of [[Angband]] to challenge Morgoth to a duel. Fingolfin wounds Morgoth seven times, and manages one last stab to Morgoth's foot before his death.<ref name=":2" />
#''"The Dark Elf"'' refers to [[Eöl]] who seduced [[aredhel|Turgon's sister]] and fathered [[Maeglin]], who would eventually betray Gondolin.<ref>{{S|16}}</ref>
#In ''"Thorn"'', Maeglin reflects on his situation and decides to betray Gondolin to Morgoth.<ref>{{S|23}}</ref>
#''"The Eldar"'' is Elvenking [[Finrod|Finrod Felagund]]'s farewell to his people, dying from wounds received in saving his human friend [[Beren]] from a [[werewolf]].<ref name=":3">{{S|19}}</ref>
#In ''"Nom the Wise"'', Beren mourns his friend Finrod. ''Nóm'' means "wise" and was the name given to Finrod by Beren's forefather [[Bëor]].
#In ''"When Sorrow Sang"'', Beren sings about his love to the Elven princess [[Lúthien]] and his death at the teeth of Morgoth's wolf [[Carcharoth]].<ref name=":3" />
#''"Out on the Water"'' refers to the last dwelling-place of Beren and Lúthien, [[Dor Firn-i-Guinar]].
#In ''"The Steadfast"'', Morgoth curses his captive [[Húrin]] who steadfastly refused to reveal the secret location of Gondolin.<ref name=":4">{{S|22}}</ref>
#In ''"A Dark Passage"'', Morgoth ponders his triumph in the [[Nirnaeth Arnoediad]]. The song also relates the origins of the kindred of men and Morgoth's curse on Húrin to be witness to his children's tragic fate.<ref name=":4" />
#''"Final Chapter (Thus ends...)"'' concludes the album, speaking of Morgoth's victory by the "treachery of man" in the Nirnaeth Arnoediad<ref>{{S|20}}</ref> but also of the [[Estel|hope]] for a new day.<ref name="S|24" />

*'''Bonus Tracks'''
#''"Harvest of Sorrow"'' has [[Túrin]] mourn the loss of his sister [[Niënor]].<ref>{{S|21}}</ref>
#''"The Tides of War"'' is about the burning of the swan ships at [[Losgar]] sung from the perspective of Feanor and Fingolfin.<ref name=":0" />
{{references}}
{{title|italics}}
[[Category:Albums]]
[[de: Nightfall in Middle-Earth]]