{{people infobox
| name=Orcs of Mordor
| image = John Howe - Orcs of the Red Eye.jpg
| caption=[[John Howe]] - ''Orcs of the Red Eye''|
| pronun=
| othernames=Mordor-orcs
| origin=A mix of [[Orcs]] bred by [[Sauron]] and Orcs of [[Morgoth]] who fled the [[War of Wrath]]
| location=[[Mordor]], [[Minas Morgul]]
| affiliation=[[Sauron]]
| rivalry=[[Númenórean]]s, [[Noldor]], [[Gondorian]]s
| language=[[Orcish]] dialects
| members=[[Grishnákh]], [[Snaga (orc of Mordor)|Snaga]], [[Lagduf]], [[Muzgash]], [[Radbug]]
| lifespan=
| distinctions=
| height=
| hair=
| skin=
| clothing=
| weapons=
}}
The '''Orcs of Mordor''' or '''Mordor-orcs''' were the [[Orcs|orc]] footsoldiers of [[Sauron]] within the Black Land of [[Mordor]]. They made up the bulk of his hosts in the wars he waged to suborn the [[Free Peoples]] throughout the [[Second Age|Second]] and [[Third Age]]s
==History==
===Second Age===
After Sauron established himself in Mordor around {{SA|1000}},<ref>{{App|B1}}</ref> he took under his command countless Orcs that continued to battle with [[Elves]] and [[Men]] over many centuries. The Orcs of Mordor were not simply gathered from the remnants of [[Morgoth]]'s armies, but were also bred anew by Sauron. 

When Sauron learned of the [[Last Alliance]], he sent many Orcs from Mordor to ambush the Allied forces who would cross the [[Misty Mountains]], but they were too strong and the Orcs hid themselves. That small detachment was eventually forgotten<ref>{{UT|Gladden}}</ref> and it's possible they mingled with the [[Orcs of the Misty Mountains]].
===Third Age===
There were many types in the service of the [[Eye of Sauron|Red Eye]], but the largest and fiercest were the [[Uruk-hai|Uruks of Mordor]], black Orcs of tremendous strength and ferocity first seen out of Mordor around {{TA|2475}}, assaulting [[Ithilien]]. Ithilien was re-taken by [[Ruling Stewards|Steward]] [[Boromir (Steward of Gondor)|Boromir]], but years later Ithilien was infested again by Mordor-orcs driving most of the people west of the [[Anduin]].<ref>{{App|Stewards}}</ref> They possibly were secretly bred in Mordor by the [[Nazgûl|Morgul-lords]] at the behest of their master [[Sauron]].<ref>{{PM|Elendil}}, pp. 204-5</ref>

Around {{TA|2480}} Sauron started to populate [[Moria]] with his creatures, and in the same time the [[Orcs of the Misty Mountains]] began to make secret strongholds in the [[Misty Mountains|Hithaeglir]] so as to bar all the passes into [[Eriador]].<ref>{{App|B2}}</ref>

During the rule of the Steward [[Egalmoth (Steward of Gondor)|Egalmoth]], Orc-wars broke out.<ref>{{PM|Elendil}}</ref><ref group=note>The nature of those wars and if they were related to the Orcs of Mordor is not clear. In the ''[[Unfinished Tales]]'' [[The Battles of the Fords of Isen|it is said]] that Egalmoth was unable to support [[Rohan]] in {{TA|2710}}; although the reason is not explained, it could be the Orc-wars. On the other hand, [[Christopher Tolkien]] connects the Orc-wars to the Orc invansions of [[Eriador]] 3 decades later ({{TA|2740}}).</ref>

It seems that Sauron could breed armies of Orcs with enormous speed when they were needed. According to [[Aragorn]], for instance, it had taken just a few years for the Orcs to multiply in Mordor to the vast hordes seen in the [[War of the Ring]]. 

Few years before the [[War of the Ring]] the Orcs began multiplying again and disrupted the transportation from [[Rhovanion]] to [[Osgiliath]] along the Anduin.<ref>{{FR|River}}</ref>

In [[February]] of {{TA|3019}} a group of Mordor-orcs under [[Grishnákh]] joined forces of the [[Orcs of Isengard]] on the plains of [[Rohan]] during the War of the Ring. Those [[Breaking of the Fellowship|raided and captured]] [[Merry]] and [[Pippin]]. Those Orcs then attempted to head east, but returned when they noticed [[Rohirrim]] approaching. Eventually they were wiped out by them.<ref>{{TT|III3}}</ref>

Orcs made up the backbone of the Eastern hordes during this War, supplemented by Easterlings, Haradrim, and monstrous creatures of Sauron.

Following Sauron's final defeat at the end of the Third Age, Western forces cleared the Black Gate and surrounding hills of Orcs easily without their master to guide them, though it is suggested many escaped into the vast wastes and steppes of Mordor's eastern lands.
{{references|n}}
[[Category:Orcs]]
[[Category:Servants of Sauron]]