{{Poem infobox
| title=Over Old Hills and Far Away
| other names=''Ʒeond fyrne beorgas ⁊ heonan feor'', ''Over old Hills and Far Away'',<ref name=appendix>{{CP|A3}}</ref> ''Over old Hills and far away'',<ref name=appendix/> ''Over old Hills & far away''<ref name=TextC>{{CP|TC}}</ref>
| written=Between [[January]] and [[February]] of [[1916]]
| revised=[[1927]]
| published=''[[The Book of Lost Tales Part One]]'',<br>''[[The Collected Poems of J.R.R. Tolkien]]''
| subject=[[Tinfang]]
}}

'''''Over Old Hills and Far Away''''' is a poem written by [[J.R.R. Tolkien]] that features [[Tinfang]], much like another [[Tinfang Warble (poem)|poem]]. It was published and commented in ''[[The Book of Lost Tales Part One]]'', where [[Christopher Tolkien]] compares the earlier readings.<ref name=BOLT>{{LT1|Over}}, pp. 108-10</ref>

==Poem excerpt==
<poem style="font-style:italic; margin-left:20px;">
:It was early and still in the night of June,
:And few were the stars, and far was the moon,
:The drowsy trees drooping, and silently creeping
:Shadows woke under them while they were sleeping.

:I stole to the window with stealthy tread
:Leaving my white and unpressed bed;
:And something alluring, aloof and queer,
:Like perfume of flowers from the shores of the mere
:That in [[Eldamar|Elvenhome]] lies, and in starlit rains
:Twinkles and flashes, came up to the panes
:Of my high lattice-window. Or was it a sound?
:I listened and marveled with eyes on the ground.
:For there came from afar a filtering<ref name=collectedpoems>{{CP|43}}</ref> note
:Enchanting sweet, now clear, now remote,
:As clear as a star in a pool by the reeds,
:As faint as the glimmer of dew on the weeds.<ref name=BOLT/></poem>

==Background==
Between [[January]] and [[February]] of [[1916]],<ref name=guide>{{CG|RG}}, p. 693 (entry "''Over Old Hills and Far Away''")</ref> Tolkien wrote the first four drafts of ''Over Old Hills and Far Away'' at Brocton Camp in Staffordshire. The earliest of which was given the name '''''Ʒeond fyrne beorgas ⁊ heonan feor''''' in [[Old English]] and "an apparently contemporaneous note"<ref name=guide/> which said "Jan[uary]-Feb[ruary] 1916"<ref name=chronology>{{CG|C}}, p. 76 (entry "?January-February 1916")</ref>, dating the poem. A typescript<ref name=chronology/> made later<ref name=chronology/> had an inscription which said "Brocton Camp, Christ[mas]-Jan[uary] [[1915]]-16"<ref name=guide/>. Later in [[1927]], Tolkien rewrote the poem while at [[Oxford]]. The latest draft of the poem was posthumously published in [[1983]] as part of ''[[The Book of Lost Tales Part One]]'', where [[Christopher Tolkien]] compared it to some earlier readings.<ref name=BOLT/>

{{references}}

{{poems}}

[[Category:Poems in The Book of Lost Tales]]