{{short description|Hobbit in ''Perry-the-Winkle''}}
{{infobox character
| people=[[Hobbits|Hobbit]]
| name=Peeping Jack
| image=
| caption=
| pronun=
| othernames=
| titles=
| position=
| location=[[Delving]]<ref name="Perry"/>
| affiliation=[[The Shire]]<ref name="Perry"/>
| language=
| birth=
| birthlocation=
| rule=
| death=
| deathlocation=
| age=
| notablefor=Spying on [[Perry-the-Winkle (hobbit)|Perry-the-Winkle]]
| family=
| parentage=
| siblings=
| spouse=
| children=
| race=[[Men]]
| gender=Male
| height=
| hair=
| eyes=
| clothing=
| weapons=
| steed=
}}

'''Peeping Jack''' was a [[Hobbits|Hobbit]] inhabitant of the town of [[Delving]] who appeared in ''[[Perry-the-Winkle]]'', a nursery rhyme<ref name=collectedpoems>{{CP|105}}</ref> by [[Samwise Gamgee]]<ref name=preface>{{AB|Preface}}</ref>.<ref name="Perry">{{AB|Perry}}, pp. 41-4</ref>

In the poem, Peeping Jack espied [[Perry-the-Winkle (hobbit)|Perry-the-Winkle]] riding to [[Faraway]] on the [[Lonely Troll]]'s back. Later, upon Perry's return, Peeping Jack revealed his spying to the rest of the People.<ref name="Perry" />

Peeping Jack was one of the [[Shire-hobbits]] who travelled to Faraway in order to demand food from the Lonely Troll. Peeping Jack was among four Hobbits who the Troll never wanted to see again.<ref name="Perry" />

== Etymology ==
The name "Peeping Jack" alludes to the character's role as a spy and is a reference to [[Wikipedia:Peeping Tom|Peeping Tom]].<ref name="IE">{{HM|IE}}, "Giving of Names"</ref>

== Background ==
In the first version of the poem in early [[1928]],<ref name=commentary>{{AB|Comm}}, ''Perry-the-Winkle''</ref> which was entitled ''The Bumpus'', Peeping Jack didn’t exist and William Winkle himself told the People where he had been.<ref name=collectedpoems>{{CP|105}}</ref> Peeping Jack was also absent in the second version on [[29 March]],<ref name=collectedpoems/> in which Tolkien revised the poem as part<ref name=collectedpoems/> of his ''[[Tales and Songs of Bimble Bay]]'' series. He was absent in the third version as well.<ref name=commentary/>

In early [[1961]],<ref name=collectedpoems/> when Tolkien revised the poem for inclusion within ''[[The Adventures of Tom Bombadil]]'', Peeping Jack first appeared with no difference in details to the published version<ref name="Perry" />.<ref name=collectedpoems/>

{{references}}

{{Legend}}

[[Category:Characters in The Adventures of Tom Bombadil]]
[[Category:Hobbits]]
[[Category:Third Age characters]]

[[fi:Kurkkija-Kalle]]