{{disambig-more|Prologue|[[Prologue (disambiguation)]]}}{{scene
| image = The Lord of the Rings (1978 film) - Prologue.jpg
| name=Prologue: A Ring's Tale
| film=[[The Lord of the Rings (1978 film)|''The Lord of the Rings'' (1978 film)]]
| number=2
| duration=3:41
| event= forging of the [[Rings of Power|Rings]],<br>[[War of the Last Alliance]]
| previous= 
| next= Bilbo's Farewell
|}}
'''''Prologue: A Ring's Tale''''' is the second scene of [[The Lord of the Rings (1978 film)|the 1978 film ''The Lord of the Rings]]''. 

==Synopsis==
Long ago, in the early years of the [[Second Age]], the [[Elves|Elven]]-smiths forged the [[Rings of Power]]. The made [[Nine Rings|nine for Men]], [[Seven Rings|seven for the Dwarves]], and [[Three Rings|three]] for the tall Elf Kings. Then, the Dark Lord [[Sauron]] learned the craft of Ring-making, and created [[the One Ring]]. 

With the Ring, Sauron conquered most of [[Middle-earth]]. But as he crushed the [[Last Alliance of Elves and Men]], [[Isildur|Prince Isildur]] lept from the shadows and took the Ring. But he did not destroy it. As he sat admiring the Ring on the banks of [[Anduin]], Orc archers shot him, and the Ring was lost in the river.

Sauron recaptured the Nine, and turned their wearers into Ringwraiths. He sent them out to seek the One Ring. The Ring was found, but not by Sauron: [[Déagol]] and [[Sméagol]] were fishing when a fish pulled Deagol out of the water. On the bottom on the river, he found the Ring. Back at shore, Sméagol wished to have it - it was his birthday after all - and killed Deagol. With the Ring, he started thieving and spying. Under the torture of the Ring, he fled into the Mountains, and became the creature [[Gollum]]. The Ring passed out of sight until [[Bilbo Baggins]] stumbled across it one day one his journey with the [[Thorin and Company|dwarves]]. Bilbo Baggins took the Ring back to [[the Shire]], his home.

==Cast==
{| class="wikitable"
|- bgcolor="#CCCCCC"
! Role !! Actor
|-
| Narrator ([[Gandalf]]) || [[William Squire]]
|-
| [[Bilbo Baggins]] || [[Billy Barty]]
|-
| [[Sméagol]] || [[Peter Woodthorpe]] (voice)
|-
| [[Isildur]] || Uncredited
|-
| [[Sauron]] || Uncredited
|-
| [[Déagol]] || Uncredited
|}
==Differences from source material==
* The forging of the Rings is said to have taken place in the "early years of the [[Second Age]]"; it took place around halfway through the Second Age.
* Sauron is said to have learned the lore of Ringmaking after the Elves had made the other rings, rather than aid [[Celebrimbor]] in the process.
* [[Elendil]] and [[Gil-galad]] did not slay Sauron; rather, Isildur came in from the shadows and surprised him.
* Sauron captured the [[Nine Rings]] and turned their wearers into [[Nazgûl|Ringwraiths]], while in the books, it was the rings that did so. Also, the Nine were "created" explicitly to seek the One Ring.
* Isildur is killed as he sits by the river fingering [[the One Ring]], and throws it away as he falls from Orc arrows, rather than it betraying him when he tries to flee.
[[Category:The Lord of the Rings (1978 film) scenes]]