{{Person infobox
| image = Przemysław Mrczkowski.png
| name = Przemysław Mroczowski
| born = 28 June 1915
| died = 12 July 2002
| education = Henryk Sienkiewicz IV Junior High School and Secondary School, Jagiellonian University, University of Notre Dame
| location = Kraków, Poland
}}

'''Przemysław Mroczkowski''' ([[28 June]] [[1915]] - [[12 July]] [[2002]]) was a Polish philologist, Anglicist, medievalist, and friend of [[J.R.R. Tolkien]].

==History==

Born in Kraków, Poland, Przemysław Mroczkowski studied at the Henryk Sienkiewicz IV Junior High School and Secondary School, which he graduated from in 1933. He went on to study Romance languages at the Jagiellonian University, graduating in 1938 after defending his thesis. His studies were interrupted by the events of World War II, which would see him in an artillery regiment and eventually a prison camp under the Gestapo.<ref name=":0" />  

Planning a move to [[University of Oxford|Oxford]] after acquiring a master's degree in English Studies from the University of Notre Dame in [[1946]], he would write to [[J.R.R. Tolkien]] and [[C.S. Lewis]] for advice and assistance. However, the legitimacy of his scholarship among other academics at Oxford was a point of contention<ref>[[Letter to Przemyslaw Mroczkowski (2 August 1946)]]</ref>, and he instead studied at Catholic University of Lublin, where he obtained a post-doctoral degree in [[1951]].<ref name=":0" /> 

He finally met Tolkien in person during a stay at Oxford in 1957, introducing himself by saying, "I come from Mordor..."<ref>''Tygodnik Powszechny,'' No. 14, 1994 </ref> Tolkien then acquainted him with the other members of [[The Inklings]], including C.S. Lewis, [[Charles Williams]], and [[Christopher Tolkien]].<ref name=":0">Łukasz Neubauer, [https://dc.swosu.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=2954&context=mythlore "The "Polish Inkling": Professor Przemyslaw Mroczkowski as J.R.R. Tolkien's Friend and Scholar," Mythlore: A Journal of J.R.R. Tolkien, C.S. Lewis, Charles Williams, and Mythopoeic Literature: Vol. 39: No. 1, Article 8.]</ref> They would go on to become close friends, with Tolkien at one point supporting him financially with proceedings from ''[[The Lord of the Rings]].''<ref>[[Letters to Przemyslaw Mroczkowski (1958)]]</ref> 

After his visit to Oxford, Mroczkowski maintained their friendship through frequent letters. Tolkien also corresponded with Mroczkowski's daughter, Maria, writing about his inspirations for ''The Lord of the Rings'', and its critics.<ref>[[Letter to Maria Mroczkowska]]</ref> Mroczkowski used his influence in Poland to persuade two Polish publishers, Iskry and Czytelnik, to release both ''The Hobbit'' in [[1960]] and ''The Lord of the Rings'' from [[1961]] to [[1963]]. Both were the world’s first translations of the novels into non-Germanic languages.<ref name=":0" /> 

{{references}}

{{DEFAULTSORT:Mroczkowski, Przemyslaw}}
[[Category:Academics]]
[[Category:Authors]]
[[Category:Letter receivers]]
[[Category:People by name]]
[[Category:Polish people]]