{{short description|Statues on the road to Dunharrow}}
{{object infobox
| name=Púkel-men
| image = The Lord of the Rings - The Return of the King - Púkel-man.png
| caption=One of the Púkel-men
| pronun=
| othernames=watch-stones<ref name=Druedain>{{UT|Druedain}}</ref>
| location=The [[Crossings of Taeglin]]<ref name=Druedain/> and the [[Stair of the Hold]]
| owner=[[Druedain]]
| type=Statue
| appearance=
| creator=[[Druedain]]
| created=
| createdlocation=The [[Crossings of Taeglin]]<ref name=Druedain/> and the [[Stair of the Hold]]
| destroyer=
| destroyed=
| destroyedlocation=
| notablefor=
}}

'''Púkel-men''' is how the [[Rohirrim]] called the images on the road to [[Dunharrow]], but it was also used as a general equivalent to [[Drúedain]].<ref>{{UT|15}}, 'Púkel-men'</ref>

== History ==
The '''Púkel-men''' were ancient carved statues of men, that stood at each turn of the switch-back road to [[Dunharrow]], the [[Stair of the Hold]], on a  steep mountain slope on the north side of the [[White Mountains]]. They resembled huge men with clumsy limbs, squatting cross-legged with short arms folded across their fat bellies. Some had eroded over the years so that they lost all features, except the eye holes that seemed to stare sadly at those who passed by.<ref name="Muster">{{RK|Muster}}, p. 794-795</ref>

The [[Rohirrim]] called the statues ''Púkel-men'' and hardly looked at them and ignored them when they passed them. Nobody in [[Rohan]] knew who carved the statues. The identity of the men who carved the statues in the Dark Years before a ship came to the western shores of Middle-earth and before the Dúnedain established the realm of [[Gondor]] had been forgotten and not remembered in any song or legend.<ref name="Muster" /> When [[Meriadoc Brandybuck|Merry]] later saw [[Ghân-buri-Ghân]], the chieftain of the Drúedain of [[Drúadan Forest]], on March 14, {{TA|3019}}, he noticed that he resembled the statues on the road to Dunharrow.<ref>{{RK|Ride}}, p. 831</ref> It is possible that the statues had been carved by the Drúedain, because they had settled in the vales on the northern side of the White Mountains in the [[First Age]] and the [[Second Age]]<ref>{{UT|12b}}</ref> and the Drúedain in [[Beleriand]] had carved statues of themselves, which they called watch-stones and placed at turnings of woodland paths.<ref name="Druedain" />

==Etymology==
The term Púkel represents [[Old English|Anglo-Saxon]] ''púcel'' ("goblin, demon"), a relative of the word ''púca'' (from which Puck<ref name=":0">{{UT|15}}, 14</ref> and the modern English word "pug"<ref>{{HM|IE}}, Giving of Names, p. 219</ref> are derived).<ref name=":0" /> It could also mean "devil" or a minor sprite, often used for ugly, mishappen persons.<ref>{{HM|N}}, entry '''Pukel-men''', p. 782</ref>

==Portrayal in adaptations==
'''2003: ''[[The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King]]'':'''
:One or more of such statues can be seen near the scene where [[Elrond]] gives [[Andúril]] to [[Aragorn]] at Dunharrow.
'''2013: ''[[The Hobbit: The Desolation of Smaug]]'':'''
:After [[Gandalf]] and [[Radagast]] leave the [[High Fells of Rhudaur]], and discuss their realisation that the [[Necromancer]] of [[Dol Guldur]] is [[Sauron]], there is a statue nearby.{{fact|is this intended to be a Púkel-man?}}
{{References}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:Pukel-men}}
[[Category:Drúedain]]
[[Category:Monuments]]
[[Category:Old English names]]