{{Sources}}
{{kingdom
| image=Sage - Reunited Kingdom.png
| name=Reunited Kingdom
| pronun=
| othernames=
| location=[[Arnor]] and [[Gondor]]<ref name="Appendix A Third Line">{{App|Mark}}, Third Line</ref>
| capital=[[Annúminas]] ([[Arnor]])<br>[[Minas Tirith]] ([[Gondor]])<ref name="Elendil">{{PM|Elendil}}</ref>
| towns='''Arnor'''<br>[[Bree]], [[Bywater]], [[Fornost Erain]], [[Hobbiton]], [[Michel Delving]], [[Tuckborough]]<br>'''Gondor'''<br>[[Calembel]], [[Dol Amroth]], [[Erech]], [[Linhir]], [[Pelargir]], [[Umbar]]
| regions='''Arnor'''<br>[[Arthedain]], [[Cardolan]], [[Rhudaur]]<br>'''Gondor'''<br>[[Anfalas]], [[Anórien]], [[Belfalas]], [[Dorwinion]], [[Enedwaith]] (shared with [[Arnor]]), [[Ithilien]], [[Lamedon]], [[Lebennin]], [[Lossarnach]], [[South Gondor]]
| population=Primarily [[Men]] (many [[Hobbits]] in the [[Shire]] and [[Bree-land]])
| language=[[Westron]], [[Númenórean Sindarin]], [[Quenya]], [[Hobbitish]]
| govern1=[[High King (Dúnedain)|High King]]
| govern2=[[Council of Gondor]]<ref name="politics"/>
| govern3=
| currency=[[tharni]], [[castar]]<ref>{{PM|Languages}}</ref>
| holiday=[[Cormarë]] 
| precededby=[[Arnor]], [[Gondor]]
| event1=Established
| event1date=[[1 May]], {{TA|3019}}
| event2=
| event2date=
| event3=
| event3date=
| event4=
| event4date=
| event5=
| event5date=
| followedby=
}}

{{quote|Thus peace came again, and a new Spring opened on earth; and the Heir of Isildur was crowned King of Gondor and Arnor, and the might of the Dúnedain was lifted up and their glory renewed.|''[[The Silmarillion]]'', "[[Of the Rings of Power and the Third Age]]"}}

The '''Reunited Kingdom''' was the restored kingdom of [[Arnor]] and [[Gondor]], the twin kingdoms founded at the end of the [[Second Age]] by [[Elendil]] and his sons [[Isildur]] and [[Anárion]]. In the beginning, Elendil was [[High King of the Dúnedain|High King]] of both realms, but the two were divided after the deaths of his sons. Over 3,000 years later [[Aragorn]] was crowned as '''''Elessar''''' and reunited the kingdoms, ruling as [[High King of the Dúnedain|High King]] of the newly-founded Reunited Kingdom.

==Geography==
During Aragorn's reign, the Reunited Kingdom was comprised of the old realms of [[Arnor]] and [[Gondor]], excluding only [[Rohan]] (the [[Oath of Eorl|grant]] of which he renewed); and the [[Shire]], the [[Drúadan Forest]], and the [[Treegarth of Orthanc]] (which became protectorates).<ref name="Appendix A"/>

The Reunited Kingdom included all the lands of [[Arnor]]; all of [[Eriador]], except the [[Lindon|regions]] beyond the [[Lune]], and the lands east of [[Greyflood]] and [[Loudwater]], in which lay [[Rivendell]] and [[Eregion]].<ref name="Eriador">{{App|Eriador}}</ref>

In [[Gondor]], the realm extended:<ref name="AppGondor">{{App|Gondor}}</ref>

* North to the [[Field of Celebrant]] and the southern eaves of [[Mirkwood]]<ref name="AppGondor"/>
* West to the [[Greyflood]]<ref name="AppGondor"/>
* East to the inland [[Sea of Rhûn]]<ref name="AppGondor"/>
* South to the [[River Harnen]], and also along the coast to the peninsula and haven of [[Umbar]]<ref name="AppGondor"/>

==Politics==
The [[Númenórean]] [[High King (Dúnedain)|High King]] governed the realm with the frame of ancient law, of which he was administrator (and interpreter) but not the maker.<ref name="politics">{{L|244}}</ref> 

In all debatable matters of importance domestic, or external, however, even [[Denethor II|Denethor]] had a [[Council of Gondor|Council]], and at least listened to what the Lords of the Fiefs and the Captains of the Forces had to say.<ref name="politics"/> [[Aragorn]] re-established the [[Council of Gondor|Great Council of Gondor]], and in that [[Faramir]], who remained by inheritance the [[Steward]] (or representative of the King during his absence abroad, or sickness, or between his death and the accession of his heir) was his chief counsellor.<ref name="politics"/>

After his accession, [[Aragorn]] established a council in [[Arnor]], because in {{FoA|13}}, he chose three [[Counsellor of the North-kingdom|Counsellors of the North-kingdom]] from the people of the [[Shire]] and [[Buckland]].<ref name="AppBLater">{{App|B5}}</ref> These Counsellors were those appointed to the positions of the [[Thain]] and [[Mayor of the Shire]], and the [[Master of Buckland]].<ref name="AppBLater"/>

==History==
===Background===
{{main|Realms in Exile}}
At the end of the [[Second Age]], [[Elendil]] and his sons established two great kingdoms in [[Middle-earth]]: [[Arnor]] in the north and [[Gondor]] in the south. These [[Kingdoms of the Dúnedain]] were united under a single [[High King of the Dúnedain|High King]], [[Elendil]] himself, who ruled the [[Arnor|North-kingdom]] while his sons reigned jointly over the South-kingdom of [[Gondor]].<ref name=rings>{{s|Rings}}</ref>

In the first years of the [[Third Age]], this union failed. After the loss of [[Isildur]] at the [[Disaster of the Gladden Fields]], his nephew [[Meneldil]] took up the [[Kings of Gondor|kingship of Gondor]], and that country remained independent from the [[North-kingdom]] through most of the [[Third Age]].<ref name=rings/>  

In the north, the realm of Arnor fell into troubled times. It broke into three separate kingdoms, and in time these too were lost, so that the Dúnedain of the North-kingdom of Elendil were reduced to a wandering people led by a [[Chieftains of the Dúnedain|Chieftain]]. Nonetheless, they were able to maintain Isildur's line in unbroken descent.<ref name=rings/>

There was only one attempt to reunite the kingdoms while they were both in existence. This attempt occurred in {{TA|1944}} when [[Arvedui]], [[King of Arthedain]], claimed the [[High King (Dúnedain)|High Kingship]] of the [[Two Kingdoms]].<ref name="AppGondor"/> His claim was rejected by Steward [[Pelendur]] and the [[Council of Gondor]], who elected to maintain their independence.<ref name="AppGondor"/>

Soon enough, the line of [[King of Gondor|Kings]] failed in [[Gondor]] altogether; [[Eärnur]] was lost without heirs. Its rule was taken up by the [[Stewards]] of the [[House of Húrin]].<ref name=rings/>

===Reunification===
====Reign of Elessar====
More than a thousand years later, after the [[War of the Ring]], Arvedui's direct descendant, [[Aragorn]], came forward to make the same claim. This time, the people of Gondor accepted a [[High King of the Dúnedain|High King]], and the Two Kingdoms were restored and reunited at last. 

[[Aragorn]] restored [[Gondor]] and repeopled it, but retained [[Minas Tirith]] as the chief city.<ref name="Elendil"/> He rebuilt [[Annúminas]] and when he went north, would rule from there.<ref name="Eriador"/> He also had the ruins of [[Fornost Erain]] rebuilt and made it a great city where [[Men]] dwelt once again.<ref name="Bound">{{RK|VI7}}</ref> [[The Shire]] was an exception to this, and though it lay within the Reunited Kingdom, Aragorn made a law that Men should not enter it, a law that he observed himself.<ref name="Eriador"/>

During his reign, he, alongside [[King of Rohan|King]] [[Éomer]], led military campaigns beyond the [[Sea of Rhûn]] and on the far deserts of the [[South]].<ref name="Appendix A">{{App|Mark}}</ref> The threat of the [[Corsairs of Umbar|Corsairs]] was finally completely subdued during his reign.<ref name="AppGondor"/> He also made peace with the [[Haradrim]] after his coronation.<ref name="RK-StewardKing">{{RK|VI5}}</ref>

====Later History====
After Aragorn's death in {{FoA|120}},<ref name="Tale">{{App|Tale}}</ref> his son [[Eldarion]] took up the High Kingship.<ref name="Tale"/> It is said that Eldarion's reign lasted for about 100 years after the death of Aragorn.<ref name="L338">{{L|338}}</ref>
Of [[Eldarion]], it was foretold that he should rule a great realm, and that it should endure for a hundred generations of [[Men]] after him, that is until a new age brought in again new things; and from him should come the kings of many realms in long days after. But if this foretelling spoke truly, none now can say, for [[Gondor]] and [[Arnor]] are no more; and even the chronicles of the [[House of Telcontar]] and all their deeds and glory are lost.<ref name="Third">{{PM|Third}}, text of manuscript T4 events after the end of the Third Age in the year 3021</ref>

==Other versions of the legendarium==
In an unfinished story set some 220 years after the fall of Sauron, the Reunited Kingdom encountered a renewal of [[Sauron]]-worship known as the [[Dark Tree]].<ref>{{PM|Shadow}}</ref> However, J.R.R. Tolkien did not finish this story, because he "discovered that the King's Peace would contain no tales worth recounting".<ref name="L338"/>

{{references}}

[[Category:Arnor]]
[[Category:Fourth Age]]
[[Category:Gondor]]
[[Category:Mannish realms]]

[[de:Wiedervereinigtes Königreich]]
[[fr:encyclo/geographie/royaumes/royaume reunifie]]
[[fi:Jällen yhdistetty Valtakunta]]