{{kingdom
| image=Ted Nasmith - View of Rhudaur.jpg
| caption="View of Rhudaur" by [[Ted Nasmith]]
| name=Rhudaur
| pronun=
| othernames=
| location=Between the [[Weather Hills]] and the [[Misty Mountains]]
| capital=
| towns=
| regions=
| population=Primarily [[Men of Arnor|Men]]
| language=[[Westron]], [[Sindarin]]
| govern1=
| govern2=
| govern3=
| currency=
| holiday=
| precededby=[[Arnor]]
| event1=Foundation
| event1date={{TA|861}}
| event2=Allied with [[Angmar]]
| event2date=By {{TA|1349}}
| event3=
| event3date=
| event4=
| event4date=
| event5=
| event5date=
| followedby=
}}

'''Rhudaur''' was the hilly kingdom that originated from the break-up of [[Arnor]] in {{TA|861}}.

==Geography==
Rhudaur was a region in the north-east of [[Eriador]], lying between the [[Ettenmoors]], the [[Weather Hills]], and the [[Misty Mountains]]. The land between the rivers [[Mitheithel|Loudwater]] and [[Hoarwell]], forming [[Angle|the Angle]], where the [[Trollshaws]] were located,<ref>{{FR|Map}}</ref> was also a part of Rhudaur.<ref name="Eriador">{{App|Eriador}}, ''The North-kingdom and the Dúnedain'', pp. 1039-1040</ref><ref name="Flight">{{FR|Flight}}, pp. 201-202</ref>

Rhudaur was characterized by dreary and rising hills, dark trees with twisted roots hanging off of cliffs, and gloomy weather. Rhudaur was a sombre, threatening, and unfriendly country.<ref name="Flight" /> 

Upon many heights and ridges were ancient stone walls, ruined towers, and ominous, evil-looking castles.<ref name="Flight" />

==History==
When the [[Exiles of Númenor]] established [[Arnor]] in the [[Second Age]], they spread out throughout [[Eriador]] and many [[Númenóreans]] settled the hills of Rhudaur.<ref name="Rings">{{S|Rings}}</ref>

In {{TA|861}} Arnor's tenth King, Eärendur, died.<ref>{{App|TA}}, entry for the year 861, p. 1085</ref> Due to dissensions between his sons the realm was split into [[Arthedain]], Rhudaur and [[Cardolan]]. There was often strife among the three kingdoms, because Rhudaur and Cardolan desired to possess the Weather Hills and the land westwards towards Bree, especially [[Weathertop]]. This was due to the fact that the tower on Weathertop contained the most important ''[[Amon Sûl-stone|palantír]]'' of the North and the other two palantíri of the North were also held by Arthedain. While the line of [[Isildur]] continued in Arthedain, it soon failed in Rhudaur and Cardolan.<ref name="Eriador" />

The first [[Stoors|Stoor]] [[Hobbits]] moved to the [[Angle]] in Rhudaur around {{TA|1150}}.<ref>{{App|TA}}, entry for the year ''c.'' 1150, p. 1085</ref> 

During the reign of King [[Argeleb I]] of [[Arthedain]], which started in {{TA|1349}},<ref>{{App|North}}, ''Arthedain'', date after Malvegil, p. 1038</ref> Argeleb claimed the lordship over all former Arnor, because no descendants of Isildur remained in Cardolan and Rhudaur, but Rhudaur resisted his claim. In Rhudaur an evil lord of the [[Hill-men]] who had a secret alliance with Angmar had seized power and there were only few Dúnedain in Rhudaur. As a consequence, Argeleb fortified the Weather Hills, which were on the border between Arthedain and Rhudaur.<ref name="Argeleb">{{App|Eriador}}, ''The North-kingdom and the Dúnedain'', paragraph about King Argeleb son of Malvegil, p. 1040</ref> In {{TA|1356}},<ref>{{App|TA}}, entry for the year 1356, p. 1086</ref> Argeleb was killed in a battle with Rhudaur and Angmar. Around this time the Stoors left the Angle and some of them returned to [[Rhovanion]].<ref name="Argeleb" />

In {{TA|1409}} Angmar attacked and ravaged [[Cardolan]] and surrounded and destroyed [[Weathertop]]. Angmar defeated the Dúnedain of Cardolan and Arthedain and the [[last prince of Cardolan]] (later interred in the Barrow-downs)<ref>{{HM|RC}}, "Fog on the Barrow-downs", pp. 144-5; Index, 'Cardolan, [[Last prince of Cardolan|last prince of]]'</ref> and King Arveleg of Arthedain were killed. Rhudaur was occupied by evil men who were subject to Angmar. The Dúnedain that had remained in Rhudaur were killed or fled westwards.<ref>{{App|Eriador}}, ''The North-kingdom and the Dúnedain'', paragraph about King Arveleg, p. 1040</ref>

In the days of [[Argeleb II]], the [[Witch-king]] sent [[wights]] from [[Angmar]] and Rhudaur to inhabit the deserted mounds of the [[Barrow-downs]].<ref>{{App|Eriador}}, ''The North-kingdom and the Dúnedain'', paragraph about King Argeleb II, p. 1041</ref>

When war brought the North-kingdom to an end, all the evil Men who inhabited Rhudaur were killed, but a shadow remained in the land. During the [[War of the Ring]], Rhudaur was completely uninhabited.<ref name="Flight" />

==Etymology==
''Rhudaur'' is a [[Sindarin]] name. According to [[J.R.R. Tolkien]] it means "Troll shaw" and contains the element ''[[rhû]]'' ("evil, wicked"). [[Christopher Gilson]] suggests in his editorial annotation within brackets that the second element is ''[[taur]]'' ("forest").<ref>{{PE|17}}, entry "S '''Rhudaur''' and entry S ''rhû'', p. 115 and entry '''OKO''', p. 170</ref> Shaw is an archaic word meaning "thicket, small wood, copse, or grove".<ref>{{HM|RC}}, p. Ixiii</ref> The Trollshaws were located in Rhudaur.<ref>{{PM|Elendil}}, Commentary, manuscript B entry Earendur "Rhudaur north of the R. Bruinen (where later were the Trollshaws)"</ref>

J.R.R. Tolkien's translation was published in [[Parma Eldalamberon 17]] in 2007. [[David Salo]] suggested in 2004 and [[Wayne G. Hammond]] and [[Christina Scull]] suggested in 2005 that ''Rhudaur'' is a Sindarin name, which means "eastern wood" or "east forest", respectively, and that it is a compound of ''[[Rhûn|rhu-]]'' ("east") and ''[[taur]]'' ("forest").<ref>{{HM|GS}}, entry '''Rhudaur''' p. 390</ref><ref>{{HM|RC}}, p. 690</ref>

==Other versions of the legendarium==
An earlier manuscript version of what would later become the Annals of the Kings and Rulers mentions that an evil people who are workers of sorcery and subjects of Angmar kill the remnants of the Dúnedain in Rhudaur and build dark forts in the hills.<ref>{{PM|Elendil}}, manuscript C, the Northern Line of Arnor: the Isildurioni, entry 18. Arveleg I</ref>

An earlier manuscript version of the the Tale of Years of the Third Age mentions that the Witch-king destroyed the remmants of the Dúnedain that lived in Rhudaur and that an evil people from the north that was much given to sorcery lived in Rhudaur for a long time.<ref>{{PM|Third}}, manuscript T4, entry for the year 1409</ref>

==Portrayal in adaptations==
'''2012: ''[[The Hobbit: An Unexpected Journey]]'':'''
:[[Galadriel]] mentions the [[High Fells of Rhudaur]] as the place where the [[Witch-king]] was buried following the fall of [[Angmar]], even though no such place and no burials of the Nazgûl are mentioned in the writings of J.R.R. Tolkien.

'''2013: ''[[The Hobbit: The Desolation of Smaug]]'':'''
:[[Gandalf]] and [[Radagast]] travel to the High Fells to examine the whereabouts of [[Nazgûl]], only to discover that they have all escaped.

{{references}}
[[Category:Arnor]]
[[Category:Sindarin locations]]
[[Category:Mannish realms]]
[[de:Rhudaur]]
[[fr:encyclo/geographie/royaumes/rhudaur]]
[[fi:Rhudaur]]