{{board game infobox
| image = Riddle of the Ring.jpg
| name=Riddle of the Ring
| designer=John Califf III, William A. Walker
| publisher=Fellowship Games (1st ed.); [[Iron Crown Enterprises]] (2nd ed.)
| illustrator=Chris White (cover)<br>[[Jessica M. Ney-Grimm|Jessica M. Ney]] (game board)<br>Charles Peale, James Holloway, and [[Jessica M. Ney-Grimm|Jessica Ney]] (card illustrations)
| development=William A. Walker, John Califf III. and [[Coleman Charlton]]
| contributor=[[John David Ruemmler]], Kurt H. Fischer, and Coleman Charlton (production)<br>Richard H. Britton (cover graphics)
| releasedate=[[1982]] (1st ed.);<ref group="note">[http://www.nobleknight.com/productdetailsearch.asp_Q_ProductID_E_2147386390_A_InventoryID_E_0 Noble Knight Games] gives [[1983]] as the year of publication.</ref> [[1985]] (2nd ed.)
| players=2-8
| ages=13+
| ice=7400
| isbn=0-425-07817-5
}}
'''''Riddle of the Ring ''''' is a board game based on [[J.R.R. Tolkien]]'s ''[[The Lord of the Rings]]''. The game was first produced by Fellowship Games, but was later released by [[Iron Crown Enterprises]].<ref>[http://www.nobleknight.com/productdetailsearch.asp_Q_ProductID_E_2147386390_A_InventoryID_E_0 Riddle of the Rings] at [http://www.nobleknight.com/ Noble Knight Games] (accessed 30 April 2011)</ref><ref>[http://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/2157/riddle-of-the-ring Riddle of the Ring] at [http://boardgamegeek.com/ BoardGameGeek] (accessed 30 April 2011)</ref>

== Front Cover Text ==

Based on J.R.R. TOLKIEN'S THE LORD OF THE RINGS

A fascinating card and boardgame for 2 to 8 players. Suitable for beginners as well as experienced gamers.

== Back Cover Text ==

RIDDLE OF THE RING is a fascinating card and boardgame suitable for beginners as well as experienced gamers. The perfect family game. Each of the 2 to 8 players becomes a Hobbit or Black Rider as he sets out to find The Ring and take it to either Mount Doom or Barad-dur. All of your favorite characters such as Gandalf, Frodo. Gollum, and Wormtongue come to life. Travel with them across the length of Middle-earth . . . adventure awaits!

RIDDLE OF THE RING is based on J.R.R. TOLKIEN'S THE LORD OF THE RINGS, but you need not be familiar with this work in order to play and thoroughly enjoy the game.

Contains
*19"x24" full-color mounted mapboard
*80 cards illustrating all of the major characters of THE LORD OF THE RINGS
*Rules, playing pieces & dice

RIDDLE OF THE RING
*Suitable for ages 13 & up
*Playing time 1–2 hours
*Complexity rating (on a scale of 1 to 10)
**Basic Game......3
**Optional Rules......4
==External links==
*[http://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/2157/riddle-of-the-ring Riddle of the Ring] at [http://boardgamegeek.com/ BoardGameGeek]
{{references|note}}
[[Category:Board games]]