{{object infobox
| name=Ring of Thrór
| image = Noble Collection - Dwarven Ring of Power.jpg
| caption=Ring of Thrór as conceived by [[The Noble Collection]]| pronun=
| othernames=Ring of Durin
| location=
| owner=[[Celebrimbor]], [[Durin III]], other [[Kings of Durin's Folk]], [[Thrór]], [[Thráin II]], [[Sauron]]
| type=Ring
| appearance=A gold ring<ref name="ring" /> adorned with a gem<ref name="Council">{{FR|Council}}</ref>
| creator=[[Celebrimbor]]
| created=c. {{SA|1590}}<ref name="SA">{{App|SA}}</ref>
| createdlocation=[[Eregion]]
| destroyer=
| destroyed=
| destroyedlocation=
| notablefor=
}}

The '''Ring of Thrór''' was the first of the [[Seven Rings|Seven Dwarf-rings]] to be forged, and the last to be recovered by [[Sauron]]. 

While Sauron himself gave the [[Dwarves]] their [[Rings of Power]],<ref name="ring" /> this one was originally given to King [[Durin III]] of [[Moria|Khazad-dûm]] by [[Celebrimbor]],<ref>{{App|Durin}}</ref> and it remained in the line of the [[House of Durin]] for thousands of years.

The [[Kings of Durin's Folk]] proved resistant to the magic of the [[Rings of Power]], as [[Dwarves]] are hard to tame and the thoughts of their hearts are hidden. The rings, used only for the gaining of wealth, amplified their wearer's natural skills and desire for dominion which made them greedy and exceedingly rich. It is said that the [[Seven Hoards]] of the Dwarves were gathered thanks to a magic Ring, before they were devoured by [[dragons]].<ref name=ring>{{S|Rings}}</ref> 

This seems to be the case with the [[Longbeards]] who massed their wealth, but during the time of the [[King under the Mountain]] [[Thrór]], [[Smaug]] [[Sack of Erebor|descended]] on the [[Lonely Mountain]] and drove the [[Dwarves of Erebor]] into exile. Long after his kingdom's destruction, Thrór passed the ring to his son [[Thráin]], who dwelt for many years as an exile from his ancient home.

At last, Thráin set out on an ill-fated quest to regain his kingdom, but he was captured by the spies of [[Sauron]], and the Ring of Thrór was lost forever. Sauron took it from Thráin by force in the dungeons of [[Dol Guldur]].

Many Dwarves, however, did not know the fate of the Ring, and thought that it was lost in [[Moria]] when Thrór was killed by [[Azog]]. It was thought that one of the reasons [[Balin]] wished to [[Balin's Colony|reclaim Moria]] was to find the Ring. In the [[Council of Elrond]], [[Gandalf]] told [[Glóin]] that Balin would not find the Ring there, as it was given to Thráin and lost in [[Dol Guldur]].<ref name="Council" /> 

==Portrayal in adaptations==
'''2012: ''[[The Hobbit: An Unexpected Journey]]'':'''
:The Ring of Thrór first appears in the Prologue, as viewers can spot two rings, presumably one of them being the Ring of Thrór. 
'''2013: ''[[The Hobbit: The Desolation of Smaug]]'':'''
:The Ring of Thrór is next mentioned in the Prologue, where Thorin tells Gandalf that Thrór gave Thráin his ring before he went to war, presumably the Battle of Azanulbizar. The Ring next appears where Thráin is seen bested by Azog, where Azog pulls out a knife, before the scene cuts to Thráin in Dol Guldor, depicting the his lost ring finger, informing Gandalf and the Audience that Azog now has Thráin's Ring, now in the possession of Sauron. 
'''2017: ''[[The Lord of the Rings Online]]'':'''
:The Ring of Thrór does not appear itself, but is named as "Angya", and is called "Handórm" by the Dwarves. Gandalf believes it to have been destroyed in the downfall of [[Barad-dûr]].

{{references}}
[[Category:Rings and jewels]]
[[Category:Heirlooms]]