{{scene
|name=Rivendell
|number=22 (extended) <br /> 
        18 (theatrical)
|duration=2:00 (extended) <br /> 
          2:06 (theatrical)
|event=[[Frodo]] wakes up in [[Rivendell]] and meets [[Gandalf]]
|film=[[The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring]]
| image = The Lord of the Rings - The Fellowship of the Ring - Gandalf and Frodo in Rivendell.png
|previous=[[Flight to the Ford (scene)|Flight to the Ford]]
|next=[[Many Meetings (scene)|Many Meetings]]
|characters=Frodo, [[Gandalf]], [[Elrond]], [[Saruman]] (flashback only), [[Gwaihir]] (flashback only)
}}
'''Rivendell''' is the eighteenth scene of ''[[The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring]]'' and the twenty-second scene of [[The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring (extended edition)|''The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring'' (extended edition)]]. 
{{title}}
==Synopsis==
Frodo is brought into Rivendell, where Elrond is briefly shown ministering to his wound in a montage. Frodo awakens to find himself in a furnished room. He hears a voice informing him of the date, October 24, and of the location: Elrond's house, in Rivendell. The voice belongs to Gandalf, who informs Frodo of his luck in surviving. Gandalf does not elaborate on why he failed to appear in [[Bree]], saying only that he was delayed. In flashback, Gandalf recalls that he managed to escape when Gwaihir, whom he had summoned previously via a moth, flies to the top of [[Orthanc]]. Gandalf throws himself onto Gwaihir as he flies away from [[Isenguard]], Saruman commenting that Gandalf has chosen death. Gandalf inform Frodo that Elrond healed him, but the three are soon interrupted by Sam and the other hobbits, who are glad to see that Frodo has recovered.

==Differences==
The scene is largely an abbreviation of the [[Many Meetings|corresponding chapter from the book]], though dialogue regarding the Ford of Bruinen and Gandalf's failure to appear is cut, instead being a flashback that Gandalf does not share with Frodo. Saruman is present at Gandalf's escape, when in the books he was not present. Gwaihir also appears because of [[Radagast]] informing the eagle to take news of the [[Ringwraiths]] to Isengard. 

[[Category:The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring scenes|22]]