{{infobox character
| people=[[Hobbits|Hobbit]]
| name=Rorimac Brandybuck
| image=Rorimac Brandybuck - The Lord of the Rings Roleplaying.jpg
| caption=Rorimac Brandybuck - ''[[The Lord of the Rings Roleplaying]]''
| pronun=
| othernames="Goldfather"
| titles=[[Master of Buckland]]
| position=
| location=[[Brandy Hall]], [[Buckland]]
| affiliation=
| language=
| birth={{SR|1302}}
| birthlocation=
| rule={{SR|1363}} - {{SR|1408|n}}
| death={{SR|1408}}
| deathlocation=
| age=106
| notablefor=
| family=[[Brandybuck Family|Brandybuck]]
| parentage=[[Gorbadoc Brandybuck]] and [[Mirabella Took]]
| siblings=[[Amaranth Brandybuck|Amaranth]], [[Saradas Brandybuck|Saradas]], [[Dodinas Brandybuck|Dodinas]], [[Asphodel Brandybuck|Asphodel]], [[Dinodas Brandybuck|Dinodas]] and [[Primula Brandybuck|Primula]]
| spouse=[[Menegilda Goold]]
| children=[[Saradoc Brandybuck|Saradoc]] and [[Merimac Brandybuck|Merimac]]
| gender=Male
| height=
| hair=
| eyes=
| clothing=
| weapons=
| steed=
}}
'''Rorimac Brandybuck''', also known as '''Old Rory''' and '''Goldfather''', was a [[Hobbits|Hobbit]] and [[Master of Buckland]].

==History==
Rorimac was the oldest son of [[Gorbadoc Brandybuck]]. He married [[Menegilda Goold]] and had two sons, [[Saradoc Brandybuck|Saradoc]] and [[Merimac Brandybuck|Merimac]]. He became [[Master of Buckland]] after his father's death in {{SR|1363}}.<ref name="Brandybuck">{{App|Brandybuck}}</ref>

After the deaths of his sister, [[Primula Brandybuck]] and her husband [[Drogo Baggins]] in {{SR|1380}}, Rorimac took their son, [[Frodo Baggins]] under his guardianship in [[Brandy Hall]] for nine years. [[Bilbo Baggins]], a kinsman of Drogo, often enjoyed Old Rory's hospitality, and eventually he proposed that Frodo could come with him to [[Hobbiton]].<ref name=party>{{FR|Party}}</ref>

Rorimac was present at [[Bilbo's Farewell Party]]. After Bilbo's [[Unseen|disappearance]], Rory was one of the first, if not the only, to suspect "Mad Baggins" was off on an adventure again, and told so to his [[Esmeralda Took|daughter-in-law]] to quiet her shock; he expressed satisfaction that there was more food to feast with and promptly asked his nephew Frodo for more wine. As part of his departure, Bilbo left him a dozen of bottles of [[Old Winyards]], and as soon as he tasted the first one, Rory voted Bilbo a capital fellow.<ref name=party/>

Rory died six years later, passing on the title of Master of Buckland to his eldest son [[Saradoc Brandybuck|Saradoc]].<ref name="Brandybuck"/>

==Etymology==
[[J.R.R. Tolkien]] noted that the names of the Bucklanders had a vaguely [[Celtic]] style.<ref name="Translation">{{App|Translation}}, p. 1135</ref>

''Rory'' is a northern Irish form of the [[Celtic]] name ''Rhuadri'' or ''Rhuaidri'', which means "red" or "ruddy". An ancient Irish hero wasd called Rory O'More. Rory or as a full name ''madadh ruadh'' ("red dog") is the common name for the fox in many Higland tales where the fox is portrayed as shrewd. This is a fitting name for Rory Brandybuck, because we are told about him that "neither age nor an enormous dinner had clouded his wits".<ref>{{HM|IE}}, "Giving of Names", p. 204</ref>

{{references}}
{{seq-start}}
{{seq-head
| race=hobbit
| house=[[Brandybuck Family]]
| born={{SR|1302}}
| died={{SR|1408}}
}}
{{seq
| prev=[[Gorbadoc Brandybuck]]
| list=[[Master of Buckland|Master]] of [[Buckland]]
| dates={{SR|1363}} - {{SR|1408|n}}
| next=[[Saradoc Brandybuck]]
}}
{{seq-end}}

{{masters}}
[[Category:Brandybuck]]
[[Category:Celtic names]]
[[Category:Hobbits]]
[[Category:Masters of Buckland]]
[[Category:Third Age characters]]
[[de:Rorimac Brandybock]]
[[fi:Rorimac Rankkibuk]]
[[fr:encyclo/personnages/hobbits/brandebouc/rorimac brandebouc]]