{{unnamed}}
{{battle
|name=Sack of Eregion
| image = The Lord of the Rings (film series) - City of Ost-in-Edhil mural.jpg
|caption=''Mural of the City of Ost-in-Edhil'' by [[Alan Lee]]
|conflict=[[War of the Elves and Sauron]]
|date={{SA|1697}}
|place=[[Eregion]]
|result=Victory for [[Sauron]]
*Destruction of Eregion
*Founding of [[Rivendell|Imladris]]
*[[Doors of Durin]] shut
|side1=[[Elves of Eregion]]<br />
[[Elves of Lindon]]<br />
[[Galadhrim|Elves of Lórinand]]<br />
[[Dwarves of Khazad-dum]]
|side2=Forces of [[Sauron]]
|commanders1=
[[Celebrimbor]] †<br />
[[Elrond]]<br />
[[Celeborn]]<br />
[[Amroth]]<br />
[[Durin III]]
|commanders2=[[Sauron]]
|forces1=Unknown
|forces2=Unknown, greater than the Elves
|casual1=Heavy
|casual2=Unknown
}}

The '''sack of Eregion'''<ref>{{NM|P1xviii}}, "Examples of application to Narrative"</ref> was the destruction of the [[Noldor]]in realm [[Eregion]] by the armies of [[Sauron]] in the [[Second Age]]. Sauron invaded Eregion to claim the [[Rings of Power]], including the [[Three Rings]], which were crafted without his knowledge.

==Background==
{{seealso|Rings of Power}}
In {{SA|1200}}, [[Sauron]] came to [[Eregion]] in disguise, claiming to be an emissary of the [[Valar]] sent to offer aid to the [[Eldar]]. Although rejected by [[Gil-galad]], he was able to win over [[Celebrimbor]] and the smiths of Eregion. The brotherhood of smiths, the [[Gwaith-i-Mírdain]], profited from his knowledge,<ref name="Galadriel">{{UT|Concerning}}</ref> and around {{SA|1500}} they began forging the [[Rings of Power]], finishing them in {{SA|1590}}.<ref name="SA">{{App|SA}}</ref> Unbeknownst to them, Sauron (who had returned to [[Mordor]]) created a master [[One Ring|Ring]] to rule the others. However, when the Elves perceived the designs of Sauron, they took off their [[Three Rings]] and gave them into the safekeeping of Elven bearers, preventing the use of the Three Rings which Sauron craved most.<ref>{{S|Rings}}</ref>

==History==
===Prelude===
Infuriated by Celebrimbor's defiance, Sauron led his host out of Mordor and invaded Eriador in {{SA|1695}}.<ref name=SA/> In response to the attack, Gil-galad sent out a force under the command of [[Elrond]] to aid Celebrimbor, as well as send word to [[Númenor]] for assistance.<ref name="Galadriel"/> Sauron also sought to recruit some [[Haradrim]], but because two [[Wizards]] had influence among them, Sauron's dominance was not entirely successful, and he took a long time to attack Eregion.<ref name="NM3">{{NM|P3xviii}}</ref>

===Battle===
[[Celeborn]] led a sortie from Eregion and drove back the vanguard of Sauron's host, later combining forces with Elrond and the reinforcements from [[Lindon]]. As Sauron's host drew closer, the defenders of Eregion could no longer hold him off, because their forces were greatly outnumbered. Sauron's forces surrounded Eregion, thus preventing Elrond and Celeborn from returning there.<ref name="Galadriel"/>

In {{SA|1697}},<ref name=SA/> [[Ost-in-Edhil]] fell, with [[Celebrimbor]] himself making a last desperate stand on the steps of the [[House of the Mírdain]]. He was taken captive by the [[Orcs]]. Sauron took the [[Nine Rings]], and had Celebrimbor tormented into revealing the location of the [[Seven Rings]]. Afterwards, Celebrimbor was shot through with Orc-arrows, and by some accounts, Sauron used Celebrimbor's body as a banner as he turned to face the host of Elrond.<ref name="Galadriel"/>

Elrond would have been overwhelmed, but the host of Sauron was attacked from the rear by the [[Dwarves of Khazad-dûm]] and the [[Galadhrim|Elves of Lórinand]] led by [[Amroth]]. Sauron halted his pursuit of Elrond and turned on the Dwarves and Elves at his rear, quickly defeating them, though this allowed Elrond and his forces to escape.<ref name="Galadriel"/>

===Aftermath===
Elrond was able to gather what remained of the Elves of Eregion and retreated northward and established a refuge, [[Rivendell|Imladris]].<ref name="Galadriel"/> Other survivors escaped into [[Khazad-dûm]]<ref name="Galadriel"/> and were granted passage by their friends the [[Dwarves]], eventually coming through the [[Misty Mountains|Mountains]] to the woodlands that would long afterwards be called [[Lothlórien]]. The Gates of Moria were shut and remained so until the [[Fellowship of the Ring]] came there thousands of years later.{{fact}}

Sauron had obtained all the [[Rings of Power]] save the [[Three Rings]], which he perceived were given to Elvish guardians: Gil-galad and [[Galadriel]]. The host of Sauron ravaged much of Eriador, pressing west to Lindon, where Sauron hoped to seize one of the Three. Furthermore, Sauron sent a bulk of his forces to [[First Siege of Imladris|besiege]] Elrond, in order to prevent him from assailing his rear.<ref name="Galadriel"/>

==Portrayal in adaptations==
'''2009: ''[[The Lord of the Rings Online]]'':'''
:In the skirmish instance, "Doom of Caras Gelebren", the player takes part defending the city against Sauron's forces.

'''2014: ''[[Middle-earth: Shadow of Mordor]]'':'''
:Sauron's attack on Eregion can be seen in a flashback when the player interacts with Celebrimbor's heirlooms. Celebrimbor is seen fighting orcs before being defeated by Sauron.

'''2024: ''[[The Lord of the Rings: The Rings of Power]]'':'''
:In the last two episodes of the second season, [[Adar]]'s army of orcs attacks and breaches into [[Ost-in-Edhil]]. Celebrimbor remains in his forge unaware of the attack, being deceived by [[Annatar]]. He is then killed by [[Sauron]] after discovering the deceit. [[Elrond]] laments the destruction of ancient knowledge as he sees a group of orcs burning books inside the city.  

{{References}}
[[Category:Conflicts of the Second Age]]