{{infobox character
| people=[[Gondorians|Gondorian]]
| name=Sangahyando
| image=
| caption=
| pronun=
| othernames=
| titles=
| position=
| location=[[Umbar]]
| affiliation=[[Corsairs of Umbar]]
| language=
| birth=
| birthlocation=
| rule=
| death=
| deathlocation=
| age=
| notablefor=
| house=[[House of Anárion]]
| parentage=''unknown''; great-grandson of [[Castamir]]
| siblings=
| spouse=
| children=
| gender=Male
| height=
| hair=
| eyes=
| clothing=
| weapons=
| steed=
}}
'''Sangahyando''' was one of the great-grandsons of [[Castamir]] the Usurper.<ref name=Telemnar>{{App|Gondor}}, entry for king Telemnar</ref>

== History ==
He and [[Angamaitë]], another great-grandson of Castamir, were leaders of the [[Corsairs of Umbar]].<ref name=ElendilC>{{PM|Elendil}}, manuscript C, The Heirs of Elendil, The Southern Line of Gondor: the Anarioni, 25. Minardil, p. 199</ref> The name Sangahyando was possibly not his birth name, but a personal warrior name (or nickname). There was no need to assert his royal descent with this name, because his royal descent was clear.<ref name=L347>{{L|347}}</ref>

Angamaitë and Sangayando learned through spies that [[Minardil]], the [[King of Gondor]], was in the [[Gondor]]ian port of [[Pelargir]] and that he suspected no peril since his father had crushed Harad and Umbar.<ref name=ElendilC/> In {{TA|1634}}<ref name=TA1634>{{App|TA}}, entry for the year 1634</ref><ref name=T4>{{PM|Third}}, manuscript T4, entry for the year 1634</ref> the Corsairs of Umbar, led by Angamaitë and Sangayando, made a raid up the river [[Anduin]], killed king Minardil in Pelargir,<ref name=Telemnar/> ravaged Pelargir<ref name=TA1634/><ref name=T4/> and the coasts and escaped with great booty.<ref name=ElendilC/>

== Etymology ==
''Sangahyando'' is a [[Quenya]] name. It literally means "Throng-cleaver"<ref name=L347/> (said to be interpretable as "hewer of hostile ranks"). The first element in the name is ''sanga'' ("press" or "throng") and the second element is ''hyando'' ("cleaver").<ref name=PE17>{{PE|17}}, p. 116 entry Q ''Sangahyanda''</ref> A throng is a closely formed body of enemy soldiers.<ref>{{L|347|133}}</ref>

== Genealogy ==
{{familytree/start}}
{{familytree | | | CAL | | |CAL=[[Calimehtar (son of Calmacil)|Calimehtar]]<br/><small>''unknown''</small>}}
{{familytree | | | |:| | | |}}
{{familytree | | | CAS | | |CAS=[[Castamir]]<br/><small>''{{TA|1259|n}} - {{TA|1447|n}}''†</small>}}
{{familytree | | | |!| | | |}}
{{familytree | | | SON | | |SON=''sons''<br/><small>''unknown''†</small>}}
{{familytree | |F|~|A|~|7| |}}
{{familytree | |:| | | |:| |}}
{{familytree | ANG | | SAN |ANG=[[Angamaitë]]<br/><small>''fl. {{TA|1634|n}}''</small>|SAN='''SANGAHYANDO'''<br/><small>''fl. {{TA|1634|n}}''</small>}}
{{familytree/end}}

== Other versions of the legendarium ==
In the manuscripts for what would later become appendix A and appendix B and in the first edition of ''[[The Lord of the Rings]]'' his name was ''Sangahyanda''.<ref name=ElendilC/><ref name=T4/> His name was changed to ''Sangahyando'' in the second edition of ''The Lord of the Rings''.<ref name=PE17/><ref>{{PM|Elendil}}, Commentary relating to the entry for king Minardil in manuscript B, p. 215</ref>

In the ''[[The Etymologies|Etymologies]]'', [[Qenya]] ''sangahyando'' ("throng-cleaver") is said to be the name of a sword.<ref>{{LR|Etymologies}}, pp. 388-9 (entries for STAG- and SYAD-)</ref><ref>{{VT|46a}}, p. 16</ref>

{{references}}
[[Category:House of Anárion]]
[[Category:Mariners]]
[[Category:Quenya names]]
[[Category:Third Age characters]]