{{Stub}}
{{battle
| image=The Lord of the Rings Online - Second Battle of the Fords of Isen.jpg
| caption=Second Battle of the Fords of Isen in ''[[The Lord of the Rings Online]]''
| name=Second Battle of the Fords of Isen
| conflict=[[War of the Ring]]
| date=[[2 March]], {{TA|3019}}
| place=The [[Fords of Isen]]
| result=Isengard victory, scattering of the Rohirrim
| side1=[[Rohan]]
| side2=[[Isengard]]
| commanders1=*[[Grimbold]]
*[[Elfhelm]]
| commanders2=Unnamed Uruk-hai captain
| forces1=About 2,000 men
| forces2=Over 10,000 Uruk-hai, Orcs, Dunlendings, Wargs, and evil men 
| casual1= Heavy
| casual2= Moderate 
}}
The '''Second Battle of the Fords of Isen''', also called the '''Second Battle of Isenford''',<ref>''[[The Chronology of The Lord of the Rings]]'', "Men and Friends" entry for March 2, p. 60</ref> was the second of [[Battles of the Fords of Isen|two conflicts]] at the [[Fords of Isen]], of which no clear accounts were ever made. It occurred on [[2 March|March 2nd]], {{TA|3019}}, just seven days after the first battle and the death of [[Théodred]].

==History==
The day after the end of the [[First Battle of the Fords of Isen]], [[Erkenbrand]] of [[Westfold]] assumed command of the [[West-mark]] after he received a message of the fall of Théodred. He sent errand-riders to [[Edoras]] asking that [[Éomer]] be sent at once with all the help that could be spared, but this request was not followed due to the machinations of [[Gríma]].<ref name="Isen">{{UT|Isen}}</ref><ref group="note">The reinforcements with Éomer and the King himself set out in the afternoon of March the 2nd, but that night the Second Battle of the Fords was fought and lost, and the invasion of Rohan began.</ref>

The forces of the West-mark were commanded by [[Grimbold]], while Erkenbrand gathered more forces in the [[Hornburg]]. Meanwhile, the [[Muster of Edoras]], which was commanded by [[Elfhelm]], came to fight [[Saruman]]'s forces at the Fords of Isen. Elfhelm wanted to abandon the fords and wished to hold up the enemy on their eastern side. Elfhelm worried that Saruman would send his army down from Isengard on the east side of Isen, but Grimbold was not willing to abandon the fords.<ref name="Isen" />

Therefore, Grimbold remained with the rest of his men on the east bank, while Elfhelm withdrew his Riders and took up his position east of the fords.<ref name="Isen" />

At night, much of Saruman's army arrived at the fords, and Grimbold had his men form a shieldwall, which held for a long time.<ref name="Isen" /> However, Grimbold, being severely outnumbered by Saruman's army, eventually had his men pull back, and this was done to aid Erkenbrand, who would need as many men as possible during the oncoming assault. 

Grimbold, seeing that the shieldwall wouldn't last for long, and realizing that it was imperative for as many soldiers as possible to aid Erkenbrand, ordered his troops to retreat, even though he knew this might be seen as inglorious. In a sudden maneuver, purposefully breaking the shieldwall, Grimbold and his men scattered in the night, turning away from the road. So it was that the greater part of his men survived.<ref name="Isen" />

===Aftermath===
Thus ended the Second Battle of the Fords of Isen. The Rider [[Ceorl]] was sent to report to [[Éomer]] about the defeat. On his way Ceorl met Théoden's band, who were already on their way to aid in the battle, only to be told about the defeat. This report made Théoden to retreat to [[Helm's Deep]].<ref name="Isen" />

When they received news from Ceorl, Gandalf rode towards [[Isengard]] with the greatest speed that [[Shadowfax]] could command. He must have met Grimbold and Elfhelm, whom he advised and ordered to go southward to join Erkenbrand and Théoden at the Hornburg.<ref name="Isen" />

==Portrayal in adaptations==
'''2013: ''[[The Lord of the Rings Online]]'':'''
: The Rohirrim forces in the battle are commanded by the Lords of the [[Westfold]]: [[Erkenbrand]] of the [[Hornburg]], [[Grimbold]] of [[Grimslade]] and Gladsúnu of Marton, with [[Elfhelm]] commanding the garrison of [[Edoras]]. The advancing host of [[Isengard]] cut Erkenbrand off and pushed him south of the river [[Isen]], Gladsúnu was killed, and Grimbold was among the last remaining defenders of the Ford, unwilling to abandon the grave of Prince [[Théodred]]. Seeing their position as lost, Elfhelm withdrew his men east of the Ford and tried to persuade Grimbold to go with them, but Grimbold refused and Elfhelm has no choice but to leave him behind.
: The player finds Grimbold in despair and willing to accept his death but motivates him to live and fight by telling him that King [[Théoden]] himself had rode to war. They escape the Ford and meet with [[Gandalf]] and Erkenbrand and proceed to regroup with [[Dúnhere]] before Gandalf orders them to march on [[Helm's Deep]].

==See also==
*[[First Battle of the Fords of Isen]]

==Notes==
[[Category:Conflicts of the War of the Ring]]
[[de:Schlacht an den Furten des Isen]]
[[fr:encyclo:evenements:3a:guerres:deuxieme bataille des gues de l isen]]
[[fi:Taistelut Rautkymin Kahlaamolla]]
<references group="note" />

==References==
<references />{{wotr}}