{{disambig-more|Secret Fire|[[Secret Fire (disambiguation)]]}}
{{object infobox
| name=Secret Fire
| image = Anna Kulisz - Ainulindale - Harmony.jpg
| caption=''Ainulindale - Harmony'' by [[:Category:Images by Anna Kulisz|Anna Kulisz]]
| othernames=Flame Imperishable<br>Imperishable Flame
| location=[[Eä]]
| owner=[[Eru Ilúvatar]]
| notablefor=Power of Creation
}}
{{quote|Therefore Ilúvatar gave to their vision Being, and set it amid the Void, and the Secret Fire was sent to burn at the heart of the World; and it was called Eä.|''[[Valaquenta]]''}}

The '''Secret Fire''', also known as the '''Flame Imperishable''' and the '''Imperishable Flame''', was Eru [[Ilúvatar]]'s mysterious power of creation.

==History==
The Secret Fire is that aspect of Eru which is his Power of Creation. Only by means of the Secret Fire can something with substance or life be made from nothing. It was by means of the Secret Fire that Eru gave to the [[Music of the Ainur]] real being and existence as [[Eä]]. 

Eru created all [[fëa]]r, including those of the [[Ainur]], [[Elves]], [[Dwarves]], and [[Men]], through the Secret Fire, and it is a part of each of them. Only a being animated with the Secret Fire can have its own true life and free will. Without it, creatures lack sentience and independent thought, though they may be puppeteered by a greater will. Aulë's Dwarves were such automata until Eru endowed them with their own fëar born of the Secret Fire.<ref>{{S|Aule}}</ref>

Even before the Music was sung, [[Morgoth|Melkor]] envied this power and sought it in the [[Void]], but the Flame Imperishable was with Eru.<ref>{{S|Ainu}}</ref> After the Music, Eru sent it to burn at the center of the [[World]].<ref>{{S|IIa}}</ref>

Only Eru as Creator could command the Secret Fire; no created being could claim this power.<ref>{{L|212}}</ref> Given this, it is unclear as to how Melkor could have "made" such creatures as [[Orcs]] and [[Dragons]] or how these could have acted in the apparently rational and self-directed manner in which they did. See [[Orcs/Origin]] for a fuller examination of this thorny issue.

[[Gandalf]] the Grey referred to both the Secret Fire and the [[flame of Anor]] while facing [[Durin's Bane|a Balrog]] on the Bridge of [[Moria|Khazad-dûm]], saying "''I am a servant of the Secret Fire, wielder of the flame of Anor.''"<ref>{{FR|II5}}</ref>

==Inspiration==
This is an alternate name of the Holy Spirit in Tolkien's mythos, like [[Ilúvatar|Eru]] is the name of God. [[Clyde S. Kilby]] mentions a discussion he had with Tolkien: "Professor Tolkien talked to me at some length about the use of the word 'holy' in ''The Silmarillion''. Very specifically he told me that the 'Secret Fire sent to burn at the heart of the World' in the beginning was the [[Airefëa|Holy Spirit]]."<ref>[[Clyde S. Kilby]], ''[[Tolkien and The Silmarillion]]'', "Tolkien as Christian Writer", p. 59</ref>

==See also==
* [[Fëa and hröa]]
* [[Orcs/Origin]]
* [[Airefëa]]

==External links==
*[http://jonathansmcintosh.wordpress.com/2015/01/06/tolkien-servant-of-the-secret-fire/ Tolkien, Servant of the Secret Fire] by Jonathan McIntosh
{{references}}

[[Category:Concepts]]
[[Category:Cosmology]]
[[de:Das Geheime Feuer]]
[[fi:Salainen Tuli]]