{{disambig-more|Siege of Gondor|[[Siege of Gondor (disambiguation)]]}}
{{battle
| image = Stephen Hickman - Siege of Minas Tirith.jpg
|name=Siege of Gondor
|conflict=[[War of the Ring]]
|date=[[13 March]] - [[14 March]] {{TA|3019}}
|place=[[Minas Tirith]] and fields of [[Pelennor]], [[Gondor]]
|result=Siege broken by Gondor and Rohan
|side1=[[Gondor]], [[Rohan]]
|side2=[[Mordor]], [[Harad]], [[Rhûn]], [[Khand]]
|commanders1=*[[Denethor]]
*[[Gandalf]]
*[[Faramir]]
*[[Forlong]]
*[[Imrahil]]
*[[Hirluin]]
*[[Théoden]]
*[[Grimbold]]
*[[Éomer]]
|commanders2=*The [[Witch-king]] of [[Angmar]]
*[[Gothmog (Lieutenant of Morgul)|Gothmog]]
|forces1=Unknown number engaged
|forces2=Unknown number engaged
|casual1=Heavy
|casual2=Heavy
}}
{{wotr}}
The '''Siege of Gondor''', also known as the '''Siege of Minas Tirith''' after [[Gondor]]'s chief city, was a series of battles waged by [[Sauron]] aimed at the capture of [[Minas Tirith]], as part of the [[War of the Ring]]. The siege was broken by the [[Battle of the Pelennor Fields]].

==History==
{{main|War of the Ring}}

===Prelude===
According to Sauron's plan to find his [[The One Ring|One Ring]] and conquer [[Gondor]], on [[20 June]] {{TA|3018|n}} he sent the [[Witch-king|Lord of the Nazgûl]] to [[Sauron's attack on Osgiliath|attack]] [[Osgiliath]].<ref name=Great>{{App|Great}}</ref> Although the chief and secret purpose of the battle was to release the Nazgûl for the hunt, it also served to test [[Denethor]]'s strength and to destroy the bridge across the river.<ref name=Hunt>{{UT|Hunt}}</ref>

For months thereafter Sauron continued to amass his forces in Mordor.<ref>{{TT|IV4}}</ref> However, the deliberate pace of his preparations was thrown into turmoil on [[6 March]] {{TA|3019|n}}<ref name=Great/> when Aragorn looked into the [[Orthanc-stone]] and revealed himself, the heir of [[Isildur]], and [[Andúril]] to Sauron.<ref>{{RK|V2}}</ref> In response Sauron ordered all of his ready forces to immediately prepare to take the capital city of Gondor.

[[Gandalf]] arrived with [[Peregrin Took|Pippin]] at Minas Tirith on [[9 March]].<ref name=Great/> Most of the citizens were sent south and west, except those skilled in the arts of healing and boys who refused to leave. The same day, 3,000 men from [[Belfalas]], [[Dol Amroth]] and other places arrived to assist the garrison. However, it was less than a tenth of what was needed. Many of those that were needed from [[Lebennin]] and Belfalas were holding off the [[Corsairs|Black Fleet]] of [[Umbar]]. As evening drew on darkness began flowing out of Mordor.<ref>{{RK|V1}}</ref>

On [[10 March]], the [[Dawnless Day]],<ref name=Great/> Gandalf saved [[Faramir]] as he was pursued closely by the Nazgȗl.  Denethor, upon hearing the report of his son on the doings in [[Ithilien]], and of his allowing the Ring-bearer to go free, reprimanded him for his decision. He also did not share his son's opinion that Osgiliath was a liability. Faramir accepted the dangerous, perhaps suicidal, charge of defending the ruined city and the [[Rammas Echor]], riding for Osgiliath.<ref name=Siege>{{RK|V4}}</ref> From the [[Morannon]] an army came forth, took [[Cair Andros]], and entered [[Anórien]]. In the evening a host issued from [[Minas Morgul]] and headed towards Osgiliath.<ref name=Great/>

=== Battles at Osgiliath and the Rammas Echor ===
On the morning of [[11 March]]<ref name=Great/> the Lord of the Nazgûl led the assault upon the western side of Osgiliath. Many boats had been built in secret which allowed them to swiftly overwhelm the defenders, who despite their fierce defence, could only do minimal casualties to the forces arrayed against them.  On [[12 March]]<ref name=Great/> Faramir retreated to the Rammas Echor. The wall did not hold long as the invaders blasted many breaches through the defences. Gandalf, upon learning the Lord of the Nazgûl was on the field, went from the city to assist the beleaguered forces. On [[13 March]],<ref name=Great/> as Faramir retired to the city he fell wounded while battling against an Easterling champion. Only a charge by Prince [[Imrahil]] and the Knights of [[Dol Amroth]] saved him. As the defenders retreated to the city, a sortie of cavalry sent out by Denethor scattered the pursuit and allowed them to come in safely. Denethor, upon seeing his son wounded and unconscious, lost his will to fight and gave no more thought to the defence of his city.<ref name=Siege/>

=== The Siege ===
The defenders of Minas Tirith watched all day on [[14 March]]<ref name=Great/> as the hosts of Mordor dug pits and set up siege weapons beyond their range. At first they mocked the supposed foolishness. But, as the Nazgûl continued swooping near the city and uttering cries of death, their morale dropped. The Mordor host then used their siege engines to launch stones at the city, many of which burst into flame as they came crashing down. Then, the heads of all those that had been slain in battle were flung over the city. The whole first level was soon in flames.

Seeing that the defenders' will was already broken, near midnight the Lord of the Nazgûl launched his assault upon the city. Swathes of defenders fled to the higher levels, but enough stayed at their posts that many attackers were killed trying to reach the walls. Most of the siege towers were also destroyed as they rolled forward. These defenders were soon overrun, however, and either fled or were slaughtered. Breaching explosives were set upon the wall, and flashes of fire and deep rumbling roared in the night as the host of Mordor began blasting down the wall. The Witch-king moved in to conquer the first level himself.

The hardest thrust was made against the [[Great Gate of Minas Tirith|Great Gate]]. The Witch-king rode beside the battering ram [[Grond (battering ram)|Grond]]. When it began to strike the gate, the Witch-King cried spells that reinforced it and weakened the gate; in only three strikes the gate was broken. All fled but Gandalf, who stood defiant. The Lord of the Nazgûl mocked him and drew his sword, flames coursing down the blade; however, at this moment the winds began to blow away the clouds Sauron had gathered over Gondor, a cock crowed and horns blown in the north heralded the coming of the Rohirrim. The Lord of the Nazgûl left to deal with the Riders of [[Rohan]] and the [[Battle of the Pelennor Fields|Battle of Pelennor Fields]] ensued. The siege was broken during the battle.<ref name=Siege/>

==External links==
* [https://acoup.blog/2019/05/10/collections-the-siege-of-gondor/ Bret Devereaux, The Siege of Gondor]

{{references}}

[[Category:Conflicts of the War of the Ring]]
[[Category:Sieges]]