{{events
| image = Lída Holubová - Nan Elmoth.jpg
| event=Sleep of Yavanna
| othernames=Peace of Arda
| date=
| location=[[Arda]]
| result=
| partof=[[Years of the Trees]]
| participants=[[Animals]] and [[plants]]
| description=An event in which the creations of Yavanna fell silent for ages
| references= 
}}

The '''Sleep of Yavanna''' was a period of the very ancient times of [[Arda]], marked by darkness and stillness of nature.

==Background==
The two great [[Two Lamps|Lamps]] of the [[Valar]] which were giving light to the World during the [[Spring of Arda]] were destroyed by [[Morgoth|Melkor]] along with the Valar's dwellings on [[Almaren]], driving them away into the [[Uttermost West|West]].<ref name=s1>{{S|1}}</ref> Thus the [[Middle-earth|Great Lands]] were left in darkness, and [[Yavanna]] protected the creatures living there by setting them to sleep and they did not grow or age until light should come again.<ref name=c3>{{S|3}}</ref> However, some forests seem to keep growing even in that darkness: when [[Thingol]] and [[Melian]] fell in their enraptured spell, "the trees of [[Nan Elmoth]] grew tall and dark before they spoke any word".<ref>{{S|Thingol}}</ref>

==History==
While the Valar were preparing the bliss of [[Valinor]] bathed in the light of the [[Two Trees of Valinor|Two Trees]], [[Middle-earth]] was in darkness and silence, and fell beasts of hideous form multiplied in [[Utumno]]. It was [[Ulmo]] who did not forsake the Outer Lands and kept the earth alive. Yavanna also came healing the hurts of Melkor, and [[Orome]] hunted monsters, and kept the shadows at bay while blowing the [[Valaróma]], albeit temporarily.<ref name=s1/>

It was during the Sleep of Yavanna when [[Aulë]] in his impatience created the [[Fathers of the Dwarves|Seven Fathers]] of the [[Dwarves]] under the mountains of [[Middle-earth]]. As Middle-earth was dark and dangerous, Aulë made his children robust and sturdy.<ref>{{S|2}}</ref>

[[Varda]] created new [[stars]] and the [[Elves]] awoke. Only Dwarves and Elves roamed Middle-earth which was lit only by the stars, and most creatures were sleeping.<ref name=c3/> Most life could be found in [[Doriath]] under the guidance of [[Melian]] and in the North where [[Orcs]] and other creatures of the [[Morgoth|Enemy]] multiplied.<ref>{{HM|Guide}}, entry "Sleep of Yavanna".</ref>

After the [[Long Night]], it was the rising of the [[Sun]] that finally returned light to Middle-earth and a [[Second Spring of Arda]].

==See also==
*[[Years of the Trees]]

{{references}}
{{seq-start}}
{{seq
| prev=[[Spring of Arda]]
| list=Major events of [[Middle-earth]]
| dates={{VY|3450}} - {{FA|1}}
| next=[[Second Spring of Arda]]
}}
{{seq-end}}
[[Category:Periods]]
[[fi:Yavannan uni]]