{{infobox character
| people=[[Orcs|Orc]]
| name=Snaga
| image=Randy Gallegos and Quinton Hoover - Snaga.jpg
| caption="Snaga" by [[:Category:Images by Randy Gallegos|Randy Gallegos]] and [[Quinton Hoover]]
| pronun=
| othernames=
| titles=
| position=
| location=[[Cirith Ungol]]
| affiliation=[[Sauron]]
| language=
| birth=
| birthlocation=
| rule=
| death=[[14 March]], {{TA|3019}}
| deathlocation=
| age=
| notablefor=
| parentage=
| siblings=
| spouse=
| children=
| race=Orc
| gender=Male
| height=
| hair=
| eyes=
| clothing=
| weapons=Whip
| steed=
}}
An [[Orcs|Orc]], addressed as '''Snaga''', was part of the garrison of the [[Tower of Cirith Ungol]]. He was one of the few survivors of the [[Battle of Cirith Ungol]]<ref name="Tower">{{RK|VI1}}</ref> on [[14 March]] {{TA|3019}}.<ref>{{App|Great}}</ref>

Snaga was running down the stairs of the tower when he encountered what he thought was a "[[Samwise Gamgee|Great Elf-warrior]]" on the stairs.  Spinning around, he fled back the way he came.  The "Great Elf-warrior" was actually [[Samwise Gamgee]] who followed the Orc, although being tired he fell behind his foe.

Snaga came upon [[Shagrat]], who ordered him to send word to [[Sauron]] that they captured a [[Frodo Baggins|Halfling]]. Snaga refused, and after a short chase, made his way to the top of the tower. There, he lashed the prisoner, [[Frodo Baggins]], with a whip. He was quickly overcome by [[Samwise Gamgee]], and fell through the trap door to his death.<ref name="Tower"/>

== Etymology ==
Snaga was a contemptuous term for the lesser [[Orcs]] of [[Mordor]] and [[Isengard]], used especially among the larger and stronger [[Uruk-hai]]. It comes from a word in the [[Black Speech]] meaning 'slave' or 'servant'.<ref>{{PE|17}}, p. 79</ref>

==Portrayal in adaptations==
'''1980: [[The Return of the King (1980 film)|''The Return of the King'' (1980 film)]]:'''
:Two Orcs appear in the role of Snaga, though none are called or credited as such. Sam encounters one on the stairs, who runs, trips and falls to his doom. A second orc is lashing Frodo. After a short fight, he too falls to his doom.

'''1981: [[The Lord of the Rings (1981 radio series)|''The Lord of the Rings'' (1981 radio series)]]:''' 
:Snaga was voiced by [[Gordon Reid]].

'''[[1989]]: [[Crack of Doom Software Adventure|''Crack of Doom'' Software Adventure''']]
:Snaga is simply referred to in-game as a "small rat-faced Orc", and is armed with a short knife. Like in the book, he will flee upon first seeing Sam, leading the player on a short chase through the tower until he reaches the "[[Shagrat|large angry Orc]]". He can be killed by Sam.

'''2003: ''[[The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King]]'''''
:Like in the animated film, Snaga's role is seemingly filled by more than one Orc. First, Sam encounters a trio of Uruk-hai on the stairs, before slaying all three of them. Later, [[Gorbag]] (who survives the battle in this adaptation) fulfills the latter role as the Orc that threatens Frodo before being killed by Sam.

==See also==
* [[Snaga (orc of Isengard)]], another Orc called Snaga

{{references}}
{{title}}
[[Category:Characters in The Lord of the Rings]]
[[Category:Orcs]]
[[Category:Servants of Sauron]]
[[Category:Third Age characters]]
[[de:Snaga#Bekannte Snagas]]
[[fi:Snaga (Cirith Ungol)]]