__NOTOC__{{artist infobox
| image=
| name=Soni Alcorn-Hender
| born=
| died=
| education=[[wikipedia:Glasgow School of Art|Glasgow School of Art]]
| style=
| images=[[:Category:Images by Soni Alcorn-Hender|Gallery]]
| location=Portugal
| website=[http://www.bohemianweasel.com Bohemian Weasel]
}}
'''Soni Alcorn-Hender''' (pronounced "Sunny")<ref name="BSA">{{webcite|articleurl=http://bohemianweasel.com/about/|articlename=About a weasel|website=[http://bohemianweasel.com/ Bohemian Weasel]|accessed=31 August 2015}}</ref> - and known by the pseudonym '''Bohemian Weasel''' - is an English artist living in Portugal. Her artwork has been exhibited by [[The Tolkien Society]] and has been published by [[Topps]] in their [[The Lord of the Rings Masterpieces]] card series.

She has cited Victorian illustration as an inspiration for her style,<ref name="LM"/> whilst the phrase "luminous aestheticism" has been used to describe her artwork.<ref>{{webcite|articleurl=http://bankstreetarts.com/exhibitions/evil-in-the-shining-light/|articlename=Evil in the Shining Light|website=[http://bankstreetarts.com Bank Street Arts]|accessed=31 August 2015}}</ref>

==History==
Alcorn-Hender grew up in southern England before moving to Scotland to complete a degree in illustration at the [[wikipedia:Glasgow School of Art|Glasgow School of Art]].<ref name="BSA"/> She moved to Portugal for the warm weather where she regularly works on commissions.<ref name="SKA"/>

Having held the works of [[J.R.R. Tolkien]] close to her heart since a young age - describing herself as "batshit crazy" about ''[[The Lord of the Rings]]''<ref name="SKA">{{webcite|articleurl=http://sketchcardart.blogspot.co.uk/2010/02/interview-with-soni-alcorn-hender.html|articlename=Interview with Soni Alcorn-Hender|dated=9 February 2010|accessed=31 August 2015|website=[http://sketchcardart.blogspot.co.uk/ Sketch Card Art!]}}</ref> - she always had a desire to create artworks based on his works. Following a recommendation by fellow artist [[Grant Gould]], in November [[2007]] she was commissioned by [[Topps]] to produce cards for the forthcoming [[The Lord of the Rings Masterpieces]] II series.<ref name="LM">{{webcite|articleurl=http://www.legendariummedia.com/2013/02/23/exclusive-interview-and-contest-with-fantasy-artist-soni-alcorn-hender-bohemian-weasel/|articlename=EXCLUSIVE: Interview with Fantasy Artist – Soni Alcorn-Hender (Bohemian Weasel)|dated=23 February 2013|accessed=31 August 2015|website=[http://www.legendariummedia.com Legendarium Media]}}</ref> In [[2013]] Alcorn-Hender also worked on the licensed cards of ''[[The Hobbit: An Unexpected Journey]]'' for Cryptozoic Entertainment.<ref>{{webcite|articleurl=https://www.cryptozoic.com/blogs/adventure-time-hobbit-and-walking-dead-sketch-card-previews|articlename=Adventure Time, The Hobbit, and The Walking Dead sketch card previews|dated=11 March 2014|accessed=31 August 2015|website=[http://www.cryptozoic.com Cryptozoic Entertainment]}}</ref>

Her artwork has been featured in ''[[Mallorn 54]]'', published by [[The Tolkien Society]] in [[2013]]. And in [[2014]] and [[2015]] Alcorn-Hender's artwork was exhibited at the Society's [[Oxonmoot]] events alongside other notable artists such as [[Ted Nasmith]]. In September 2015 her artwork was exhibited in the "[http://bankstreetarts.com/exhibitions/evil-in-the-shining-light/ Evil in the Shining Light]" exhibition.

==See also==
*[[:Category:Images by Soni Alcorn-Hender|Images by Soni Alcorn-Hender]]

==External links==
* '''[http://www.bohemianweasel.com Bohemian Weasel]''' (official website)
* [http://bohemianweasel.deviantart.com/ Bohemian Weasel] at deviantArt
* [http://valarguild.org/varda/Tolkien/encyc/art/gallery/BohemianWeasel/caveBohemianWeasel.htm The Bohemian Weasel's Cave] at ValarGuild

{{references}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:Alcorn-Hender, Soni}}
[[Category:Artists]]
[[Category:British people]]
[[Category:People by name]]