{{artist infobox
| image=Spiros_Gelekas.png
| name=Spiros Gelekas
| born=July 4, [[1979]]
| died=
| style=
| images=[[:Category:Images by Spiros Gelekas|Images by Spiros Gelekas]]
| location=[[Wikipedia:Greece|Greece]]
| website=https://www.spirosgelekas.com/
}}
'''Spiros Gelekas''' (born [[1979]]) is a professional painter-artist specializing in fantasy, modern and abstract art. Born and raised in Corfu, Greece, he continues to live there today.

==History==
Spiros began his career as an interior designer and took early painting classes under renowned Corfiot artist Spiros Alamanos in 1987. After nearly 15 years as a professional interior designer for commercial establishments and private homes, he transitioned exclusively to art. His exhibitions in Greece and abroad gained him instant recognition. He creates individual surrealistic paintings.

Gelekas has been creating art since his childhood, and began painting in 1998. He has been influenced by fantasy literature such as ''[[The Lord of the Rings]]'' and ''[[The Silmarillion]]'', as well as by fantasy and science fiction movies (such as the Lord of the Rings and Star Wars) and by rock music. The writers whose work he states has had a significant influence on his style of thinking and expression include Edgar Allan Poe, Tom Robbins, Carlos Castaneda, Umberto Eco, and, the most influential, [[John Ronald Reuel Tolkien]].<ref>https://www.spirosgelekas.com/about-spiros</ref>

==Published Artwork==
===Cover art===
*[[2021]]:'' [[Echoes of Ancient Greek Literature in J.R.R. Tolkien's Work]]''

===Featured===
*[[2023]]:'' [[Tolkien Calendar 2023]]''

===Online Exhibition===
*[https://www.spirosgelekas.com/middle-earth Spiros Gelekas Tales from Middle-earth]
==See also==
*[[:Category:Images by Spiros Gelekas|Images by Spiros Gelekas]]

==External links==
*'''[https://www.spirosgelekas.com/ Official website]'''


{{references}}
{{IllustratorsCalendars}}
[[Category:Artists]]
[[Category:Greek people]]
[[Category:People by name]]