{{object infobox
| name=Elendilmir
| image = Rondador - Armor Emblem.png
| caption=''Armor Emblem'' with the Elendilmir by [[Rondador]]
| pronun=
| othernames=Star of Elendil, Star of the North, Star of the North Kingdom
| location=[[Andúnië]], [[Rómenna]], [[Anduin]], [[Orthanc]], [[Annúminas]], [[Fornost]] [[Minas Tirith]]
| owner=[[Silmariën]], [[Valandil (Lord of Andúnië)|Valandil]], [[Lords of Andúnië]], [[Elendil]], [[Isildur]], [[Saruman]], [[Valandil (King of Arnor)|Valandil]], [[King of Arnor|Kings of Arnor]], [[King of Arthedain|Kings of Arthedain]], [[Chieftain of the Dúnedain|Chieftains of the Dúnedain]], [[Aragorn]], [[Eldarion]], [[High King (Dúnedain)|High Kings of the Reunited Kingdom]]
| type=Jewels
| appearance=Two noble star-shaped white gems set upon ''[[mithril]]'' fillets
| creator=[[Númenóreans]] and [[Elves|Elves of Rivendell]]
| created=Early [[Second Age]] and Early [[Third Age]]
| createdlocation=[[Númenor]] and [[Rivendell]]
| destroyer=
| destroyed=
| destroyedlocation=
| notablefor=
| gallery=the Elendilmir
}}

The '''Elendilmir''', also known as the '''Star of Elendil''', was the name given to the two star-shaped white gems set upon ''[[mithril]]'' fillets,<ref name="Gladden">{{UT|Gladden}}</ref> The second was borne as the token of royalty on the brows of the [[King of Arnor|Kings of Arnor]]. As such, the second was known by the names '''Star of the North''' and '''Star of the North Kingdom'''.

==History==
===First Elendilmir===
The first jewel dated back to the early centuries of [[Númenor]], and belonged to [[Silmariën]], the daughter of King [[Tar-Elendil]]. From her, it passed to her descendants the [[Lords of Andúnië]].<ref name="Gladden"/> Much later, following the same custom of Númenor, the [[Sceptre of Annúminas|Sceptre]] was the main symbol of royalty in Arnor, not the crown, so they bore the Elendilmir, bound on their brows with a silver strand.<ref name=eriador>{{App|Eriador}}, p. 1043</ref>

Isildur had only been King for two years when he was waylaid by [[Orcs]] and lost in the [[Anduin|Great River]] in the [[Disaster of the Gladden Fields]].  When he put on [[The One Ring]] to escape from the battle he became invisible but the Elendilmir did not, blazing instead like a red and wrathful star. Much later the Elendilmir was found by [[Saruman|Saruman's]] trackers who had been sent to find the One Ring. They did not discover the Ring but they brought to him the Elendilmir and other things.<ref name="Gladden"/>

===Second Elendilmir===
The original Elendilmir was lost with Isildur, and so a copy was made by the elven smiths of [[Rivendell]] for his son [[Valandil (King of Arnor)|Valandil]]. This second Star of Elendil became the royal symbol of the [[Arnor|North-kingdom]] along with the [[Sceptre of Annúminas]]. After that kingdom's fall it remained an heirloom of the [[Heir of Isildur|Heirs of Isildur]] and kept in [[Rivendell]].<ref name=eriador/> It remained in Isildur's line down to the time of [[Aragorn]],<ref name="Gladden"/> who wore it upon his brow during the [[Battle of the Pelennor Fields]].<ref>{{RK|V6}}, p. 848</ref> After the [[Siege of Minas Tirith]], Aragorn gave the Star to the keeping of the sons of Elrond before his healing work at the [[Houses of Healing]].<ref>{{RK|V8}}, p. 861</ref> He used it again during his coronation, bound with a silver strand.<ref>{{RK|VI5}}, pp. 966-7</ref>

After the [[War of the Ring]], King Elessar ordered the restoration of Orthanc and then the original Elendilmir was found within a steel closet by [[Gimli]]. As Elessar took up the kingship of [[Arnor]] he wore the original Elendilmir upon his brow. He would only wear it again on high days, whilst on other occasions he would wear the second Elendilmir that had descended to him.<ref name="Gladden"/><ref name="UTIsen">{{UT|Isen}}, Appendix (ii)</ref>

{{references}}

[[Category:Arnor]]
[[Category:Heirlooms]]
[[Category:Rings and jewels]]