{{infobox character
| people=[[Númenóreans|Númenórean]]
| name=Tar-Ancalimon
| image=
| caption=
| pronun=
| othernames=
| titles=[[King of Númenor]]
| position=
| location=[[Númenor]]
| affiliation=[[King's Men]]
| language=[[Adûnaic]], [[Sindarin]] and [[Quenya]]
| birth={{SA|1986}}<ref name=Tar-Ancalimon>{{UT|Kings}}, entry XIV ''Tar-Ancalimon''</ref>
| birthlocation=
| rule={{SA|2221}} - {{SA|2386|n}} (165 years)<ref name=Tar-Ancalimon/>
| death={{SA|2386}}<ref name=Tar-Ancalimon/>
| deathlocation=
| age=400
| notablefor=
| house=[[House of Elros]]
| parentage=[[Tar-Atanamir]]<ref name=Tar-Atanamir>{{UT|Kings}}, entry XIII ''Tar-Atanamir''</ref>
| siblings=
| spouse=
| children=[[Tar-Telemmaitë]]<ref name=Tar-Telemmaite>{{UT|Kings}}, entry XV ''Tar-Telemmaitë''</ref>
| gender=Male
| height=
| hair=
| eyes=
| clothing=
| weapons=
| steed=
}}
'''Tar-Ancalimon''' was the fourteenth [[King of Númenor]].<ref name=Tar-Ancalimon/>

== History ==
During the reign of Tar-Ancalimon the rift between the [[King's Men]], the larger part of the population that followed the Kings in their growing opposition to the [[Ban of the Valar]], and the [[Faithful]], those who maintained friendship with the [[Eldar]], became wider. Many of the King's Men began to stop using the Elven-tongues and no longer taught them to their children. Despite the rejection of the Elven-tongues, the royal titles were still given in [[Quenya]]. This was done out of custom and for fear that breaking the time-honoured usage would create ill-fortune.<ref name=Tar-Ancalimon/>

Several notable events occurred during his reign:
* The [[Ringwraiths]] first appeared in Middle-earth<ref>{{App|SA}}, entry for the year 2251 of the Second Age</ref>
* [[Umbar]], a haven of the Númenórean King's Men, was turned into a fortress<ref>{{App|SA}}, entry for the year 2280 of the Second Age</ref> 
* The city of [[Pelargir]] was built and became the chief haven of the Faithful Númenóreans<ref>{{App|SA}}, entry for the year 2350 of the Second Age</ref>
* The great [[Eagles]] of [[Manwë]] left Númenór; previously a pair had dwelt in an eyrie in the summit of the tower of the King's palace in [[Armenelos]], living on the bounty of the King, since the days of [[Elros]].<ref>{{UT|3}}</ref>

== Etymology ==
''Ancalimon'' ({{IPA|[ˌtaraŋˈkalimon]}}) is a [[Quenya]] name. Its meaning is not glossed, but Paul Strack suggests it means "Brightest", and seems to be a masculinised form of ''ancalima'' ("brightest"),<ref>{{L|297}}, paragraph about the name ''Eärendil''</ref> which consists of the superlative or intensive prefix ''[[an-]]'' and the element ''[[kalima|calima]]'' ("bright").<ref>{{webcite|author=Paul Strack|articleurl=https://www.eldamo.org/content/words/word-1254790427.html|articlename=Q. ''Ancalimon'' m.|website=Eldamo|accessed=24 December 2021}}</ref> Like all the rulers of Númenor who took their royal names in Quenya, ''Ancalimon'' added the prefix ''tar-'' ("high") to his name when he received the [[Sceptre of Númenor|Sceptre]].<ref>{{UT|Kings}}, first paragraph and entry I to XXV</ref>

== Genealogy ==
{{familytree/start}}
{{familytree | CIR |CIR=[[Tar-Ciryatan]]<br/><small>''{{SA|1634|n}} - {{SA|2035|n}}''</small>}}
{{familytree | |!| |}}
{{familytree | ATA |ATA=[[Tar-Atanamir]]<br/><small>''{{SA|1800|n}} - {{SA|2221|n}}''</small>}}
{{familytree | |!| |}}
{{familytree | ANC |ANC='''TAR-ANCALIMON'''<br/><small>''{{SA|1986|n}} - {{SA|2386|n}}''</small>}}
{{familytree | |!| |}}
{{familytree | TEL |TEL=[[Tar-Telemmaitë]]<br/><small>''{{SA|2136|n}} - {{SA|2526|n}}''</small>}}
{{familytree | |!| |}}
{{familytree | VAN |VAN=[[Tar-Vanimeldë]]<br/><small>''{{SA|2277|n}} - {{SA|2637|n}}''</small>}}
{{familytree/end}}

==Other versions of the legendarium==
In the ''[[Appendix B|Tale of Years]]'', it said in {{SA|2251}} "Tar-Atanamir takes the sceptre", however, Atanamir died in 2221. 2221 is itself an emendation of 2251, and the former (2221) appears in the later tables, while the latter (2251) in the earlier tables: therefore 2251 (properly 2221) should have read "Death of Tar-Atanamir. Tar-Ancalimon takes the sceptre".<ref>{{UT|Kings}}, Note 10</ref>

{{references}}
{{seq-start}}
{{seq-head
| race=numenorean
| house=[[House of Elros]]
| born={{SA|1986}}
| died={{SA|2386}}
}}
{{seq
| prev=[[Tar-Atanamir]]
| list=14th [[King of Númenor]]
| dates={{SA|2221}} - {{SA|2386|n}}
| next=[[Tar-Telemmaitë]]
}}
{{seq-end}}

{{numenorkings}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:TarAncalimon}}
[[Category:Characters in The Silmarillion]]
[[Category:House of Elros]]
[[Category:King's Men]]
[[Category:Rulers of Númenor]]
[[Category:Second Age characters]]
[[Category:Númenóreans]]
[[de:Tar-Ancalimon]]
[[fi:Tar-Ancalimon]]
[[fr:encyclo/personnages/hommes/2a/numenoreens/tar-ancalimon]]