{{infobox character
| people=[[Gondorians|Gondorian]]
| name=Tarannon
| image=Matěj Čadil - Tarannon Falastur of Gondor.jpg
| caption="Tarannon Falastur of Gondor" by [[:Category:Images by Matěj Čadil|Matěj Čadil]]
| pronun=
| othernames=''Falastur'' ([[Quenya|Q]], "Lord of the Coasts")
| titles=[[Kings of Gondor|King of Gondor]]
| position=[[Captain of the Hosts]]
| location=[[Gondor]]
| affiliation=
| language=[[Westron]]
| birth={{TA|654}}
| birthlocation=
| rule={{TA|830}} - {{TA|913|n}} (83 years)
| death={{TA|913}}
| deathlocation=
| age=259
| notablefor=
| house=[[House of Anárion]]
| parentage=[[Siriondil (King of Gondor)|Siriondil]]
| siblings=[[Tarciryan]]
| spouse=[[Berúthiel]]
| children=None
| gender=Male
| height=
| hair=
| eyes=
| clothing=
| weapons=
| steed=
}}
'''Tarannon Falastur''' ({{TA|654}}<ref name="Elendil">{{PM|Elendil}}, manuscript C, The Southern Line of Gondor: the Anarioni, 12. Falastur</ref> – {{TA|913|n}},<ref name="South">{{App|South}}, ''Kings of Gondor'', Tarannon Falastur, p. 1038</ref> aged 259 years) was the twelfth [[Kings of Gondor|King of Gondor]]<ref>{{App|South}}, ''Kings of Gondor'', p. 1038</ref>.

==History==
Tarannon was [[Captain of the Hosts]] and the first of the [[Ship-kings]] of Gondor, who extended the realm along the shores west and south of the [[Ethir Anduin]]. Commemorating his victories, Tarannon assumed the name "Falastur" when he took the crown.<ref name="Gondor">{{App|Gondor}}, entry for King Tarannon, p. 1044</ref>

Tarannon was also famous for his Queen, the "nefarious, solitary, and loveless" [[Berúthiel]]. Tarannon had built a house downstream of [[Pelargir]] that rested upon arches sunk into the waters of the [[Ethir Anduin]], but the queen refused to live within the sound and smell of the sea. She lived in the King's House in [[Osgiliath]] where she owned cats said to be able to spy upon men. Eventually Tarannon placed her upon a boat cast adrift at sea.<ref>{{UT|Istari}}, Note 7</ref> He was then the first king to die without an heir, and was succeeded by his nephew, the second of the Ship-kings, [[Eärnil I]].<ref name="South"/>

==Etymology==
''Tarannon'' is [[Quenya]]. Its meaning is not glossed, but Helge Fauskanger suggests that it means "High-gift" or "Lord or the Gate" and is a compound of ''[[tar]]'' ("high", "king") and a masculinized form of ''[[anna]]'' ("gift") or a Sindarin-influenced form of [[annon]] ("great gate").<ref>{{webcite|author=Helge Fauskanger Strack|articleurl=https://folk.uib.no/hnohf/quen-eng.htm|articlename=Quettaparma Quenyallo|website=folk.uib.no|accessed=27 September 2024}}</ref>

The epithet ''Falastur'' is [[Quenya]]. It means "Lord of the Coasts".<ref name="Gondor" /> As Paul Strack explains, it is a compound of ''falassë'' ("coast") and  ''-tur'' ("lord").<ref>{{webcite|author=Paul Strack|articleurl=https://www.eldamo.org/content/words/word-1487252109.html|articlename=Q. ''Falastur'' m.|website=Eldamo|accessed=29 October 2021}}</ref>

==Genealogy==
{{familytree/start}}
{{familytree | | | | | | | ATA | | |ATA=[[Atanatar I]]<br/><small>''{{TA|480|n}} - {{TA|748|n}}''</small>}}
{{familytree | | | | | | | |!| | | |}}
{{familytree | | | | | | | SIR | | |SIR=[[Siriondil (King of Gondor)|Siriondil]]<br/><small>''{{TA|570|n}} - {{TA|830|n}}''</small>}}
{{familytree | | | | | |,|-|^|-|.| |}}
{{familytree | BER |~| TAR | | TAC |BER=[[Berúthiel]]<br/><small>''unknown''</small>|TAR='''TARANNON FALASTUR'''<br/><small>''{{TA|654|n}} - {{TA|913|n}}''</small>|TAC=[[Tarciryan]]<br/><small>''unknown''</small>}}
{{familytree | | | | | | | | | |!| |}}
{{familytree | | | | | | | | | EAR |EAR=[[Eärnil I]]<br/><small>''{{TA|736|n}} - {{TA|936|n}}''†</small>}}
{{familytree | | | | | | | | | |!| |}}
{{familytree | | | | | | | | | CIR |CIR=[[Ciryandil]]<br/><small>''{{TA|820|n}} - {{TA|1015|n}}''†</small>}}
{{familytree/end}}

==Other versions of the legendarium==
An earlier version of what would later become Appendix A stated that his victories had "extended the sway of Gondor far along the shore-lands on either side of the Mouths of Anduin".<ref name="Elendil" />

{{references}}

{{seq-start}}
{{seq-head
| race=gondorian
| house=[[House of Anárion]]<small><br/>Cadet branch of [[House of Elros]]</small>
| born={{TA|654}}
| died={{TA|913}}
}}
{{seq
| prev=[[Siriondil (King of Gondor)|Siriondil]]
| list=12th [[Kings of Gondor|King of Gondor]]
| dates={{TA|830}} - {{TA|913|n}}
| next=[[Eärnil I]]
}}
{{seq-end}}

{{southernline}}
[[Category:Gondorians]]
[[Category:House of Anárion]]
[[Category:Rulers of Gondor]]
[[Category:Third Age characters]]
[[de:Tarannon Falastur]]
[[fr:encyclo/personnages/hommes/3a/dunedain/gondoriens/tarannon falastur]]
[[fi:Tarannon]]
[[fi:Falastur]]