{{location infobox
| name=Tarn Aeluin
| image=Elena Kukanova - Aeluin.jpg
| caption="Aeluin" by [[Elena Kukanova]]
| pronun={{respell|eye|loo-een}}
| othernames=Aeluin
| location=Eastern [[Dorthonion]], south-west of [[Ladros]]
| type=Lake
| description=A lake of clear waters with wild heaths about it
| regions=
| towns=
| inhabitants=[[Barahir]] and his [[XII Bëorings|twelve followers]]
| created=
| destroyed=
| events=[[Massacre at Tarn Aeluin]]
| gallery=Tarn Aeluin
}}

{{quote|But the waters of Tarn Aeluin were held in reverence, for they were clear and blue by day and by night were a mirror for the stars...|''[[Quenta Silmarillion]]'', "[[Of Beren and Lúthien]]"}}

'''Tarn Aeluin''',<ref name="Beren">{{S|Beren}}</ref> sometimes referred to as just '''Aeluin''',<ref name=MR>{{MR|P4}}, p. 325</ref> was a clear blue mountain lake in the eastern highlands of [[Dorthonion]], southwest of [[Ladros]].<ref>{{S|Map}}</ref> It was situated among wild heather hills, themselves surrounded by trackless and uninhabited forests and highland plains of heather. [[Alders|Alder-trees]] were known to grow beside the lake.<ref name="Beren"/>
  
==History==
Tarn Aeluin was said to have been hallowed by [[Melian]] the [[Maiar|Maia]].<ref name="Beren"/>

When [[Aegnor]] saw the reflection of [[Andreth]] in Tarn Aeluin, he fell in love with her.<ref name=MR/>

[[Barahir]] and his [[XII Bëorings|twelve followers]] hid from [[Morgoth|Morgoth's]] forces after the [[Dagor Bragollach]] and made their lair at Tarn Aeluin. There they remained hidden until they were betrayed by [[Gorlim]].<ref name="Beren"/>

== Etymology ==
''Aeluin'' is clearly [[Sindarin]], being never glossed. [[Paul Strack]] explains it means "Blue Lake", from ''[[ael]]'' ("lake, pool") + ''[[luin]]'' ("blue").<ref>{{webcite|author=[[Paul Strack]]|articleurl=http://eldamo.org/content/words/word-2322146435.html|articlename=S. ''Aeluin'' loc.|website=Eldamo|accessed=24 May 2022}}</ref> ''Tarn'' is an [[Uncommon words|archaic English word]] meaning "mountain lake".

== Other versions of the legendarium ==
According to the text in "[[The Complaint of Mîm the Dwarf]]", [[Mîm]], the last of the [[Petty-dwarves]], had made his first work of art at Tarn Aeluin during his youth.<ref>''Klett- Cotta: Das erste Jahrzehnt 1977-1987: Ein Almanach'', "[[The Complaint of Mîm the Dwarf|Mîms Klage]]", pp. 302-305</ref>

{{References}}

[[Category:Beleriand]]
[[Category:Dorthonion]]
[[Category:Lakes]]
[[Category:Sindarin locations]]

[[de:Aeluin]]
[[fi:Aeluin]]