{{infobox character
| name=Telimektar
| people=[[Valar#Other versions of the legendarium|Vala]]
| image=
| caption=
| pronun=
| othernames=''Telumaithor/Telumaithar'', ''Daimort/Daimord'' ([[Gnomish|G]])<br />''Mordo/Taimordo/Taimondo'', ''Telmaithron'', ''Taimavar'' ([[Qenya|Q]])
| titles=
| position=
| location=[[Valinor]]<br />[[Tol Eressëa]]<br />[[Ilwë]]
| affiliation=
| language=
| birth=
| birthlocation=
| rule=
| death=
| deathlocation=
| age=
| notablefor=Guarding the world from [[Melko]]'s return
| family=
| parentage=[[Tulkas]] & [[Nessa]]
| siblings=
| spouse=
| children=[[Lúthien (son of Telimektar)|Lúthien]]<sup>[[Telimektar#Other versions of the legendarium|NB]]</sup>
| gender=Male
| height=
| hair=
| eyes=
| clothing=
| weapons=Silver sword
| steed=
}}
'''Telimektar''' was a [[Valar|Vala]], the son of [[Tulkas]], according to the early version of the [[legendarium]] in ''[[The Book of Lost Tales]]''.<ref name="War"/>

== History ==
=== Early history ===
Telimektar is first mentioned in the ''Lost Tales'' in the story of ''[[the Chaining of Melko]]''. There, he was "but just war-high" when he fought at his father's side against [[Melko]] in the war which ended with the captivity of the Enemy. In that story Telimektar had "a long sword girt about his waist by a silver girdle."<ref name="War">{{LT1|IV}}, p. 101</ref>

His next mention is during the [[Darkening of Valinor]], where he was pursuing Melko along with the other [[Valar]].<ref>{{LT1|VI}}, p. 154</ref>

=== Later history ===
According to one text, when Melko broke free of his second imprisonment (after the [[March of Liberation]]), he went to [[Tol Eressëa]] in order to sow dissension between the [[Gnomes]] and the [[Solosimpi]], who sent for help to [[Valinor]]. However, the only aid that came from the Valar was that of Tulkas, who in secret sent his son Telimektar to Tol Eressëa to aid them.

There, Telimektar, with the help of [[Ingil]]<ref group="note">In ''[[The Cottage of Lost Play]]'', it is said that Ingil eventually returned to Valinor, which seems to represent a different, distinct idea from the one mentioned above.</ref> son of [[Inwë]], surprised Melko and wounded him, and chased him up the [[Pine of Tavrobel]] all the way to [[Ilwë]]. However, Melko kept attacking the [[Sun]] and the [[stars]], and in the end caused the death of [[Urwendi]] the steerer of the Sun-vessel.

Finally, the Valar decided to cut down the great Pine, which left Melko stranded out of the world.

However, Telimektar and Ingil had to remain in the sky, guarding ceaselessly until Melko's return in the [[Great End]]. There, [[Varda]] periodically gives him [[stars]] to replace the ones Melko destroys and to remind the world of the Valar's watch - and the constellation of [[wikipedia:Orion (constellation)|Orion]] is afterwards seen as his image in the sky.<ref>{{LT2|VI}}, outline '''4''', pp. 281-2</ref>

== Etymology ==
The name ''Telimektar''<ref group="note">In the later outlines of the ''Lost Tales'', his name is given as '''''Telumektar''''' instead.</ref> is in [[Qenya]].<ref name="Eld">{{webcite|author=[[Paul Strack]]|articleurl=http://eldamo.org/content/words/word-1989343939.html|articlename=ᴱQ. ''Telimektar'' pn.|website=Eldamo|accessed=5 April 2022}}</ref> It is glossed as "Orion, literally Swordsman of Heaven" in the [[Qenya Lexicon]], under the root [[TELE]] ("cover in").<ref>{{PE|12}}, p. 90</ref><ref group="note">The name '''''Telimbektar''''' is given as an alternative to ''Telimektar'' in the Lexicon.</ref> The name is comprised of ''[[telimbo]]'' ("canopy, sky") + ''[[ektar]]'' ("swordsman").<ref name="Eld"/>

== Other names ==
The [[Gnomish]] cognate of ''Telimektar'' is '''''Telumaithor''''',<ref group="note">In ''[[The Book of Lost Tales Part One]]'', this name is given as '''''Telumaithar'''''.</ref> with the earlier forms of the name being ''Telumaithron'' and ''Telumaithweg''.<ref>{{PE|11}}, p. 70</ref>

One of his names was '''''Mordo'''''. It is a Gnomish word adopted into Qenya, being derived from ''[[mavar]]'' ("shepherd") through Gnomish ''[[mord]]'' - its meaning being a poetic one for "man, warrior" or otherwise possibly derived from the "warlike qualities of the shepherds". A similar name was '''''Taimordo''''' ('''''Taimondo''''' being a corrupt form of the name), with '''''Daimort''''' (changed from ''Daimord''<ref>{{PE|11}}, p. 29</ref>) being its Gnomish cognate.<ref>{{PE|12}}, p. 62</ref><ref group="note">The true Qenya cognate of ''Daimord'' was '''''Taimavar''''', with the other forms given above being corruptions of the name.</ref><ref>{{webcite|author=[[Paul Strack]]|articleurl=http://eldamo.org/content/words/word-76152031.html|articlename=G. ''Daimord'' m.|website=Eldamo|accessed=5 April 2022}}</ref>

Another late name for the character was '''''Telmaithron'''''.<ref>{{PE|14}}, "[[The Names of the Valar]]", p. 13</ref>

== Genealogy ==
{{familytree/start}}
{{familytree | | | | | AUL |y| YAV | | | | |AUL=[[Aulë]]|YAV=[[Yavanna]]}}
{{familytree | | | | | |,|-|^|-|.| | | | | |}}
{{familytree | VAN |y| ORO | | NES |y| TUL |ORO=[[Oromë]]|VAN=[[Vána]]|NES=[[Nessa]]|TUL=[[Tulkas]]}}
{{familytree | | | |!| | | | | | | |!| | | |}}
{{familytree | | | NIE | | | | | | TEL | | |NIE=[[Nielíqui]]|TEL='''TELIMEKTAR'''}}
{{familytree | | | | | | | | | | | |!| | | |}}
{{familytree | | | | | | | | | | | LUT | | |LUT=[[Lúthien (son of Telimektar)|Lúthien]]<sup>[[Telimektar#Other versions of the legendarium|NB]]</sup>}}
{{familytree/end}}

== Other versions of the legendarium ==
In one of the later outlines, which might have formed the basis for ''The Book of Lost Tales'', Telimektar was said to have a son called [[Lúthien (son of Telimektar)|Lúthien]].<ref>{{LT2|VI}}, outline '''16''', pp. 301-2</ref>

The idea of Telimektar and Ingil (known to [[Men]] in later ages as Orion and Sirius respectively) guarding against Melko's eventual return was ultimately abandoned. In its place, the idea of [[Eärendel]] keeping the watch on the [[Door of Night]] through which Melko/Morgoth was thrust at the end of the [[War of Wrath]], was adopted instead.<ref>{{SM|2a}}, p. 75</ref>

Of the name ''Telimektar'' remained only the mention of [[Telumehtar]] as a name of Orion in the [[The Lord of the Rings Appendices|Appendices to ''The Lord of the Rings'']].<ref>{{App|E1i}} (entry concerning the pronunciation of "H" in the Elvish languages)</ref>

{{references|notes}}
[[Category:Characters in The Book of Lost Tales]]
[[Category:Qenya names]]
[[Category:Valarindi]]
[[de:Telimektar]]
[[fi:Telimektar]]