{{film infobox
| image = The Peril to the Shire.jpg
| caption = 
| name = The Peril to the Shire
| director = Douglas Dunklin
| producer = Douglas Dunklin<br/>'''Assistant producers:'''<br/>Grace Dunklin and Aaron Brown
| writer = '''Screenplay:'''<br/>Douglas Dunklin<br/>'''Based on the Writings of:'''<br/>[[J.R.R. Tolkien]]<br/>
| narrator = 
| starring = Grace Dunklin<br/>Samuel Dunklin<br/>Lauren Leak<br/>Aaron Brown<br/>Ethan Milukas<br/>Evan Stroud<br/>Zach Yokum<br/>Nick Yokum
| music = [[Howard Shore]]<br/>[[Brobdingnagian Bards]]<br/>Lorenna Mckennit<br/>The Rogues<br/>Lauren Leak<br/>Mike and Leeaura Marcum<br/>J Michele Swartz<br/>Grace Dunklin
| cinematography = Aaron Brown<br/>Zach Yokum
| editing = Douglas Dunklin<br/>Grace Dunklin<br/>Aaron Brown<br/>Zach Yokum
| studio = Pointy Stick Productions
| distributor = None
| released = [[12 June|June 12]], [[2007]]
| runtime = approx. 210 minutes
| country = United States
| language = English
| budget = 
| website = [https://pointystickproductions.com/peril-to-the-shire/ Official website]|
}}
'''The Peril to the Shire''' is a [[:Category:Fan films|fan film]] written and directed by Douglas Dunklin, produced by Pointy Stick Productions.

==Production Information==
''The Peril to the Shire'' was created as an experience project by a group of home-schooled students and their families from Coweta and Fayette counties, Georgia.

Written by Colonel Douglas Dunklin, the original screenplay explores a "what if" scenario based on ''[[The Lord of the Rings Appendices|The Appendices]]''. It was originally written as a Christmas present to his daughter in 2005.

The project to turn it into a film started in March 2006, by gathering several friends and families and forming "Pointy Stick Productions". The film was completed in June 2007, and premiered to a private audience that same month.

==Plot==
The story takes place some four months after [[Frodo Baggins|Frodo]] left [[the Shire]] (December {{TA|3018}}); main players are [[Rose Cotton]] and her (original) cousin Hamfoot. On their road to [[Budgeford]], they come across a wounded Elf maid with a dire message.

Rosie and her cousin, along with some friends set out to save the Shire from imminent destruction. The danger is far bigger than they could ever imagine

==Characters==
* [[Rose Cotton]]
* Daisy, Lily, and Zinnia Burrows
* Hamfoot "Hammie" Cotton
* Malloriel
* [[Fredegar Bolger|Fredegar "Freddy" Bolger]]
* Halfred Bracegirdle
* Bungo, Lungo, and Mungo Chubb
* Hawkeye
* Mrs. Bracegirdle
* [[Samwise Gamgee]]
* Naremir
* Thengildur
* Haldigund
* Ironfist
* Pudluk
* Gorf

==Crew==
* Director: Douglas Dunklin
* Writer: Douglas Dunklin
* Concept art:
**Rachel Brown
**Grace Dunklin
*Storyboards
**Caitlin Clary
**Sutton Milukas
**Evan Stroud
**Douglas Dunklin

* Sindarin translators:
**J. Michele Swartz
**Lauren Leak

==Reception==
<!-- This is going to require some links, please -->
{{quote|I had the real blessing of watching Peril to the Shire and I have to say I enjoyed it enormously! I can't believe the passion and devotion to Tolkien that was behind such a great undertaking.|"Patty" at ''theonering.net''}}

{{quote|A well thought out storyline. I do like the what was the rest of the world was doing while the Fellowship was off gallivanting about tales. [...] The talents of your elvish singers and harpist also deserve recognition. Your credits [...] complete with popsicle wrangler [...] were a treat as well.|"Sevilodorf" at ''theonering.net''}}

==Trailer==
{{#ev: youtube|mBHF_KEUrgE|500}}

==External links==
* '''[https://pointystickproductions.com/peril-to-the-shire/ Official website]'''

{{Fan films}}

[[Category:Fan films|Peril to the Shire]]