{{scene
|name=The Nazgûl
|film=[[The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring]]
| image = The Lord of the Rings (film series) - Ringwraiths Enter Bree.jpg
|number=13 (theatrical edition)<br>
        16 (extended edition)
|duration=3:24 (theatrical edition)<br>
          3:44 (extended edition)
|event=The [[Nazgûl|Ringwraiths]] attack the [[Prancing Pony]]; the hobbits leave [[Bree]] with [[Aragorn]]
|characters=[[Frodo Baggins|Frodo]], [[Samwise Gamgee|Sam]], [[Meriadoc Brandybuck|Merry]], [[Peregrin Took|Pippin]], [[Aragorn]], [[Nazgûl|Ringwraiths]]
|previous=[[At the Sign of The Prancing Pony (scene)|At the Sign of the Prancing Pony]]
|next=[[The Midgewater Marshes]]
}}

'''The Nazgûl''' is the fourteenth scene of ''[[The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring]]'' and the sixteenth scene of [[The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring (extended edition)|''The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring'' (extended edition)]].

==Synopsis==
The [[Nazgûl]] enter [[Bree]], riding down the gatekeeper. They enter into the [[Prancing Pony]], their terror overcoming [[Barliman Butterbur]]. The hobbits are shown to be sleeping as the Ringwraiths poise their blades above what seem to be the Hobbits and then stab downwards as [[Samwise Gamgee|Sam]] jolts awake. However, the hobbits are actually in another room entirely. The Ringwraiths have only stabbed empty beds. They yell out in anger as the other hobbits wake up. Aragorn briefly explains that the Ringwraiths were once great [[Men]] who were given [[Rings of Power]]. The rings converted their recipients into wraiths that are under the control of [[Sauron]]. They now exist solely to find the [[The One Ring|One Ring]] and will hunt Frodo as long as he bears it. Aragorn leads the Hobbits away from Bree as the sun dawns to get away from the Ringwraiths.

The hobbits escape from Bree. Merry and Frodo briefly discuss Aragorn's trustworthiness. Frodo decides to trust Aragorn for the moment. The hobbits briefly stop to make a second breakfast before Aragorn reprimands them. Eventually they reach the [[Midgewater Marshes]].

==Differences==
*In the books, the perpetrators of the attack at Bree are Men who work for the Nazgûl rather than the Nazgûl themselves. 
*Barliman Butterbur's role is drastically reduced. In the books, he assists the hobbits, but in the movie, he only appears once after his introduction, cowering from the Ringwraiths.
*The explanation of the Ringwraiths does not come from Aragorn.
*Snow is shown on the ground, but it is still the middle of October.
*The second breakfast joke is original to the movies.
*The dialogue regarding Aragorn's appearance takes place in the inn, not in the forest.

{{title}}
[[Category:The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring scenes|16]]