{{disambig-two|the chapter from [[The Two Towers]]|scene from [[The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers]]|[[The White Rider (scene)]]}}
{{chapter
| image=Peter Xavier Price - The White Rider.jpg
| title=The White Rider
| book=The Two Towers
| number=5
| event=[[Aragorn]], [[Gimli]], and [[Legolas]] meet [[Gandalf]] after his transformation.
| date=[[1 March]] {{TA|3019|n}}
| location=[[Fangorn Forest]]
| previous=Treebeard (chapter)
| next=The King of the Golden Hall
}}

'''The White Rider''' is the fifth chapter of the first book in ''[[The Two Towers]]''.

==Summary==
The story now returns to the three travelers hunting for their lost companions. They found a leaf from [[Lothlórien|Lórien]] and crumbs of food in the grass, as well as pieces of cut cord. They also found an [[Orcs|Orc]] knife. They followed the [[Hobbits|Hobbit]] footprints up to [[Treebeard]]'s rock wall and when they climbed up to the top they once more saw an old man who had appeared earlier.

The old man came to them and reveals himself to be [[Gandalf]]. He told them that the old man they had seen earlier had not been him but [[Saruman]]. He also told them that their missing Hobbit friends have gone with the [[Ents]] to [[Isengard]], to fight Saruman. He told [[Aragorn]] that he must go to their aid.

He told them what had happened when he had fallen into the abyss with the [[Balrogs|Balrog]] [[Durin's Bane]]. Gandalf had held on to the enemy's heel and the Balrog had taken him up to the highest peak from where Gandalf had flung the Balrog to its death. [[Gwaihir]], who had been sent by Lady [[Galadriel]], had found Gandalf there. He had been taken to [[Lothlórien]], where he had been clad in white and healed. Lady Galadriel's messages of caution were given to the three and they set off.

The White Rider (Gandalf) then summoned [[Shadowfax]], his horse, which he had taken from [[Théoden]] along with two others. Gandalf set [[Gimli]] on his own horse and they rode off toward the halls of Théoden, [[Éomer]]'s king.
==Composition==
The chapter was probably completed by the early summer of [[1942]].<ref>{{CG|CG}}, p. xxiv</ref>
{{references}}
[[fi:Valkoinen ratsastaja (TSH)]]
{{DEFAULTSORT:White Rider}}
[[Category:The Two Towers chapters]]