{{Disambig-two|the band called The Fellowship|The Fellowship of the Ring|[[The Fellowship of the Ring (disambiguation)]]}}
{{band
| image = 
| name= The Fellowship
| origin=
| genre=World Music
| years=1990
| label=
| members=[[Carvin Knowles]]
| formermembers=
}}
''''The Fellowship'''' is a collective of musicologists, world-music artists and early-music performers, led by music director [[Carvin Knowles]]. Their style incorporates elements of world music, chant and music from ancient civilizations. They perform on an all-acoustic array of ancient and modern instruments that includes harp, cello, lute, hurdy-gurdy, krumhorn and gong. ''The Fellowship'' have released one album,  ''[[In Elven Lands]]''.  

== History ==
The band was formed in 1990 as "The Houndes," featuring Caitlin Elisabeth, Carvin Knowles and Patrick Delaney. In 1998 they changed their name to "The Fellowship" when they began a musicology experiment to discover how the music of  [[J.R.R. Tolkien]]’s [[Middle-earth]] may have sounded. Within two years of beginning the recording project, their new direction drew a community of like-minded musicians and guest artists who wanted to participate in their musicological experiment.<ref name="Kolb">{{Cite web|articleurl=https://www2.lbl.gov/Publications/Currents/Archive/Feb-17-2006.html#storyTitle0|articlename=Caitlin Elizabeth: Lady of the Elven Lands|author=Ron Kolb|date=17 February 2006|website=[https://www2.lbl.gov/Publications/Currents/Archive/ The Berkeley Lab View]}}</ref><ref name="site">{{Cite web|articleurl=http://inelvenlands.com/about.html|articlename=About In Elven Lands|website=[http://inelvenlands.com In Elven Lands]}}</ref>

== Music ==

The first edition of their album ''[[In Elven Lands]]'' featured vocals by Jon Anderson (lead singer of the progressive rock band "Yes") on four songs.<ref name="Kolb"/> For the digitally remastered Second Edition, Jon Anderson is absent, replaced by South African countertenor Stephen Diaz and New Zealand Maori singer Dennise Pehi.<ref name="site"/>

The Fellowship also created and performed early music covers of several themes from [[The Lord of the Rings (film series)|''The Lord of the Rings'' film series]] and [[The Hobbit (film series)|''The Hobbit'' film series]] for the final credits of the behind the scenes documentaries of each of the films. These instrumental covers were based on Howard Shore's established themes for Gondor, Dale, The Shire and the hobbits, the dwarven themes, elven themes of Mirkwood and Lothlórien, et al.

==Members==
*Caitlin Elisabeth (vocals, cello, rebec)
*Carvin Knowles (lute, harp, flutes, krumhorn, oboe, corneto, slide trumpet, horn, gong)
*Patrick Delaney (drums)
*Adam Pike (voice, percussion)
*Eddie Freeman (guitar)
*Marta Victoria (vocals)
*Ethan James (hurdy-gurdy)
*Kate St. Píerre (vocals)
*David Uebersax (sacbutt, trombone)
*Stefan Kac (tuba)
*Susan Skup (vocals)
*Stephen Diaz (vocals)
*Dennise Pehi (vocals)
*Jon Anderson (vocals)

{{References}}
==External links==
* [http://inelvenlands.com Official website]

{{DEFAULTSORT:Fellowship (band), The}}
{{title}}
[[Category:Bands]]
[[Category:Early music]]