{{cleanup}}
{{disambig-more|Angmar|[[Angmar (disambiguation)]]}}
{{video game infobox
| image = The Lord of the Rings Online- Shadows of Angmar box.jpg
| name=The Lord of the Rings Online:<br>Shadows of Angmar
| developer=[[Turbine|Turbine, Inc]]
| publisher=[[Turbine|Turbine, Inc]] (North America and Europe)<br />[[Midway Games]]<br />[[Codemasters]] (Europe, till 2010))<br/>[[IT Territory]] (Russia)<ref name="Korea and Russia">{{webcite|author=William Dobson|articleurl=http://www.engadget.com/2009-04-23-lord-of-the-rings-online-launches-in-korea-and-russia.html|articlename=Lord of the Rings Online launches in Korea and Russia|dated=23 April 2009|website=Engadget|accessed=23 August 2020}}</ref><br/>[[NHN Corporation]] (South Korea)<ref name="Korea and Russia"/><br>[[Sakura Internet]] (Japan, till 2009)<ref>{{webcite|author=Karl B.|articleurl=http://qj.net/turbine-eyes-japanese-market-for-lotro-distribution/|articlename=Turbine eyes Japanese market for LotRO distribution|dated=22 September 2006|website=qj.net|accessed=23 August 2020}}</ref>
| platform=Microsoft Windows
| releasedate=[[24 April|April 24]], [[2007]]
| genre=MMORPG
|}}

'''''The Lord of the Rings Online: Shadows of Angmar''''' was the original release version of ''[[The Lord of the Rings Online]]'', serving as the first volume of the game. Launched on [[24 April]] [[2007]], it encompasses Volume I of the game's epic story, including all content and features introduced through subsequent free content updates up until the release of the ''[[The Lord of the Rings Online: Mines of Moria|Moria]]'' expansion. [[Turbine]] and [[Midway Games, Inc.]] launched the game in North America, while [[Codemasters]] handled the European version of the game.

The story starts at the beginning of ''[[The Fellowship of the Ring]]'' Book I, Chapter III "[[Three is Company]]" and ends at the end of Book II, Chapter II "[[The Council of Elrond]]".

==Cast==
The majority of the dialog in the game is purely text-based, though characters often have a few lines of spoken dialogue.

{| class="wikitable"
|- bgcolor="#CCCCCC"
! Role !! Actor
|-
| [[Gandalf]] || [[Harry Chase]]
|-
| Sandar / Chef Vraz / Warg Rider Goblin || [[Mike Vaughn]]
|-
| Additional Voices || [[Brian Talbot]]
|-
| Additional Voices || [[Neil Kaplan]]
|-
|}

==Volume I of the epic story line==
The original prologues and books one through eight were included with this title when it was first released.

===Introduction===
There are five different introductions depending on the race of the player. The introductions for Dwarves, Elves, Hobbits and Men were the original introductions. The introduction for Beornings was introduced in the update ''Gondor Aflame'', for High Elves in the ''[[The Lord of the Rings Online: Mordor|Mordor]]'' expansion, and for Stout-axes in the ''[[The Lord of the Rings Online: Minas Morgul|Minas Morgul]]'' expansion. They are listed here because they eventually fold back into the original prologues.

====Hobbit and Man====
The Hobbit introduction begins at a dusk road in Green Hill Country, via Old Odo's Leaf-farm to a brigand jail somewhere. After a sudden rescue the Hobbit eventually ends up in Archet. The Race of Men introduction begins in a jail in a brigand camp somewhere. After a dramatic and violent escape the Man eventually ends up in Archet. From there the two races' introductions merge.

The player along with two Hobbits escaped the brigand jail with the aid of the Ranger [[Strider]] and his friend [[Amdir (Shadows of Angmar)|Amdir]]. During the escape, Amdir was stabbed by one of the Black Riders. He looks very pale and Strider is concerned for him. Strider wants to find him aid and warn the people of Archet that Blackwolds mean to raid the town. He also mentions that he needs to find a Mister Baggins before the Black Riders do. 

The player seeks out Captain Brackenbrook and warns him of the Blackwold threat. Yet, he doesn't trust the Rangers that you are with and doesn't believe the player. The player tries to warn other citizens, but no one believes an attack is imminent. Strider is informed that the player is unable to convince anyone that they are in danger. Strider tells the player to hone their skills to prepare for battle. 

Once the player is finished practicing, Strider requests for the player to find some [[Kingsfoil]] to treat Amdir's wounds. He also suggests aiding Captain Brackenbrook to win over his favor. The captain informs the player where some Kingsfoil grows. He also accepts your aid, telling you to help Calder Cob who has been having problems with wolves on his farm. 

====Dwarf and Elf====
When the Elf player visits the Refuge of Edhelion, is comes under attack from [[Skorgrím Dourhand]] and his clan. The player's master Talaga, in order to protect the elven relics the dwarf-king seeks, brings down the library of Edhelion on both him and Skorgrím.

The dwarf player, however, starts much later, at the Silverdeep mine. He meets Gandalf right before Thorin and Company set off towards the Shire to meet Bilbo. Dourhands and Longbeards now live together.

Both storylines converge years later, when tensions have appeared in the relation between the two Dwarven groups, culminating in the corpse of their fallen king being raised as a wight by Ivar the Blood-hand.

====High Elf====
In the High Elf introduction, the player participates in the [[War of the Last Alliance]]. Gravely wounded by the Witch-king, it takes many years in the care of [[Rivendell]] for the player to heal. When finally recovered, the player departs on a journey towards [[Ered Luin]] with [[Elladan and Elrohir]].

====Stout-axe====
At the start of the Stout-axe introduction, the player is a slave [[Sauron]]. Eventually the player can flee during a revolt, and seeks refuge among the Dourhands. The wight of [[Skorgrím Dourhand]] has just risen, however, and the player and a lone Dourhand named Nagli are the only ones who refuse his call. They end up at Thorin's Hall to progress with the regular Dwarf prologue.

====Beorning====
The player is spending idle time on the shores of the river [[Anduin]] with another [[Beorn]] named Sterkist, the player's brother. He reflects if there is more to life than spending it gazing at the river after chores are done. The voice of [[Radagast]] is heard coming from [[Grimbeorn]]'s lodge. Sterkist wonders what brought the wizard to their home. He sends you to Varthmath to see if he knows the answer. If he knows, he's not telling the player. He instructs the player to mind their own business and bring the milk-cow back into her pen. After herding the cow, the player meets up with Ofolmóth who remarks that the player has grown soft. He challenges the player into a spar. After he's had enough, he tells you to hunt the sickle-files that plague the area. After defeating a number of them the player's sister Langhár draws your attention from a nearby field of clover. The two of you head back Grimbeorn's lodge. Along the way the player spots goblins. Langhár tells the player to warn the others at the entrance to the lodge. You find Sterkist and tell him about the goblins. It is unusual for them to venture this close to home since they fear the Beorn. You overhear Radagast talking to Grimbeorn saying that word of this unusual activity by the goblins needs to be relayed to other folk that can be trusted. Radagast wants him to send all of his kin, but Grimbeorn said he could only spare one, the player. Packing up some belongings, the player makes towards the mountains on horseback. 

After a long journey, the player arrives in [[Archet]]. The player asks Letty Foxtail if she knows where the Ranger [[Aragorn]] is at as he heard he was heading this way. She says that he did pass this way. She tells the player to seek out [[Jon Brackenbrook]] as he might know more. Jon states that he doesn't know where Aragorn went to. He informs the player that the town was attacked and nearly burned down by [[Blackwolds|Blackwold]] brigands. He says they have slain his father, the leader of Archet and that he is trying to rebuild the settlement.<ref group="note">As depicted in the Man introduction</ref>. He requests the player's assistance.

===Prologue===
There are four different prologues with the dwarf/stout-axe and elf/high elf prologue merging at one point. Although they are initially separated by race, a player of any race can do any of the prologues.

::'''Dwarf and Stout-axe:'''

::'''Elf and High Elf:'''

::'''Dwarf, Stout-axe, Elf and High Elf:'''

::'''Hobbit:'''

::'''Man and Beorning:'''

===Book I - Stirrings in the Darkness===
After the prologue, the player is sent to [[Aragorn]], who needs your help to weaken the Blackwolds, a hostile gang within Breeland, secretly backed by agents of [[Angmar]]. After helping Aragorn and the [[Rangers of the North|Rangers]], they send you to [[Tom Bombadil]] to destroy the evil in Othrongroth, The Great Barrow of the [[Barrow-downs]]. Though the Wightlord Sambrog is defeated, the [[Witch-king]], Ivar and Skorgrim escape. Upon returning to [[Bree]], you discover Aragorn has left with the [[Hobbits]] and the player meets [[Gandalf]], who was too late to help. As he leaves for [[Rivendell]] too, he instructs you to find one of his fellow [[Istari]].

===Book II - The Red Maid===
[[Radagast|Radagast the Brown]] asks for your help in cleansing Garth Agarwen from the evil wights that inhabit it. Ultimately you and Radagast will fight Ivar the Bloodhand, their leader and a servant of the Witch-king. After succeeding, you are urgently sent to the North Downs to aid the Rangers there.

===Book III - The Council of the North===
You are asked by [[Halbarad]] to aid in the defence of the North Downs against Angmar's forces, by uniting the three main armies of the North Downs: the Men of Trestlebridge, the [[Dwarves]] led by [[Dori]] and [[Gildor]]'s Elves. After this, You are sent to Rivendell, where the [[Fellowship of the Ring|Fellowship]] has now safely arrived.

===Book IV - Chasing Shadows===
[[Nazgûl|The Black Rider]] that survived the Flood of [[Elrond]] is still in the [[Trollshaws]], making it impossible for the Fellowship to leave. With the help of [[Legolas]], [[Elladan]] and [[Elrohir]], you chase the Nazgûl, destroying the Trolls he has corrupted, and forcing the Ringwraith to retreat to the [[Misty Mountains]]. You are sent to pursue him, where [[Glóin]] and [[Gimli]] have set up camp.

===Book V - The Last Refuge===
Your search for the [[Nazgûl]] brings you to the final stronghold of Skorgrim and the Dourhands. An assault led by Gimli will result in the fall of Skorgrim and the Dourhands. But the Nazgûl has fled to Helegrod, where the ancient Dragon Thorog has been revived in order to serve the [[Sauron|Dark Lord]]. You arrive just in time to stop the Nazgûl, defeating him and making the Dragon harmless, for now. Now that Rivendell is safe, it is time to move on to [[Angmar]] itself.

===Book VI - Fires in the North===
Rangers, led by Corunir and Golodir, have gone to Angmar and their kinsmen want to know what has become of them. Upon entering Angmar, you find Corunir safe in a friendly Hillmen village. He begs you to find his lost company, who passed through Rammas Deluon: a great series of statues that weakens (or even kills) those who pass it. But after destroying the spirits within them, you are able to resist the power of Rammas Deluon, and find a dwarf settlement, where a part of the scattered party lives.

===Book VII - The Hidden Hope===
You are informed Golodir settled at Gath Forthnir, far in the North. When arriving there, Golodir is gone and the Rangers are led by his daughter, Lorniel. Lorniel reveals that Golodir has been captured by [[Mordirith]], Steward of Angmar, and has been locked away in [[Carn Dûm]]. As leader of the remaining Rangers, and with the help of Laerdan, Lorniel launches an assault on Carn Dûm, where she is slain by Mordirith, who then releases Golodir, to continue his torture. 

===Book VIII - The Scourge of the North===
Golodir's grief for the death of his daughter has almost destroyed him, yet he sees a chance to avenge her. Reclaiming an ancient sword, he travels with you to the heart of [[Carn Dûm]], defeating Mordirith with the blade. Mordirith drops his ''[[palantír]]'', a great seeing stone, which is quickly taken by the mysterious Sara Oakheart.

This was the last storyline that came with the original release.

===Book IX: Shores of Evendim===
The first free content update was released on 14 June 2007.<ref>[http://www.lotro-europe.com/news.php?id=3611&pagename=home&search=yes&keyword=Book%209 Book 9: Shores of Evendim Release Date Announced]</ref>

You learn Sara Oakheart is no less than [[Amarthiel]], the Champion of Angmar. She has set up a plot from Barad Gularan to use you to weaken Mordirith. Now she has the ''palantír'', she can communicate with Sauron and challenge Mordirith's position. You are sent to kill all of Mordirith's Knights, in an attempt to further weaken his power. But despite your victories over Mordirith, Amarthiel only grows stronger. After losing [[Fornost]] and Barad Gularan, she moves to [[Annúminas]], the ancient capital of [[Arnor]]. The Rangers there, led by Calenglad, need your aid.

Updates included:
*A new region - [[Evendim]] - is added, including locations like [[Annúminas]].<ref name="book9">{{webcite|author=|articleurl=http://www.lotro.com/news/pressreleases/136-book-9-shores-of-evendim-release-date-announced|articlename=Book 9: Shores of Evendim Release Date Announced!|dated=5 June 2007|website=LOTRO|accessed=19 February 2012}}</ref>
*A 24-player raid is added, ''Battle for Helegrod''.<ref name="book9"/>

===Book X: The City of Kings===
The second free-content update was released on 21 August 2007 in North America and on 24 August 2007 in Europe.<ref>| [http://www.lotro-europe.com/news.php?id=3949&pagename=home&search=yes&keyword=Book%209 Codemasters Online and Turbine unveil Book 10: The City of the Kings]</ref>

A massive battle in Annúminas ensues, the wise [[Elves|Elf]] Laerdan offers his services to Calenglad. One of Amarthiel's captains is captured, but while in captivity, he angers Laerdan, making the Elf decide to fight Amarthiel on his own, in an attempt to make up for his mistakes in the past. Again the Free People have been tricked by Amarthiel and her servants. Together with the Rangers of Evendim, you are able to wrestle the ''palantír'' from Amarthiel's clutches, but Laerdan is lost. But within the ''palantír'', Amarthiel saw a glimpse of where Narchuil, her ancient ring, lies. She is now determined to possess its power once more.

Updates included:
* A reputation system was introduced, allowing players to increase or decrease their reputation with various factions in Middle Earth.

===Book XI: Prisoner of the Free Peoples===
The third free-content update was released on 24 October 2007 in North America<ref>[http://www.lotro.com/article/430 Turbine and Codemasters Online Gaming to Unveil Book 11: Defenders of Eriador for The Lord of the Rings Online]</ref> and 25 October in Europe.<ref>[http://www.lotro-europe.com/news.php?id=4661&articletype=News Codemasters Online and Turbine to unveil Book 11: Defenders of Eriador]</ref>

Amarthiel's captain Mordrambor breaks free, killing many rangers. Soon he leads an army out of [[Annúminas]], to find Amarthiel's Ring, Narchuil. You attempt to find Narchuil before Amarthiel can, searching the ancient ruins of the [[Trollshaws]]. After much searching, it turns out Narmeleth, Laerdan's daughter, who originally caused Amarthiel's fall in Fornost, has become possessed by her. But all searching seems in vain, when it is revealed Amarthiel has already found Narchuil. However, Elrond does not fall for her trickery again, he realises Narchuil is still out there, and Laerdan knows where.

Updates included ([http://lorebook.lotro.com/wiki/Release_Notes_Book_11_Official complete release notes]):
*Player housing – players will be able to customize their houses with items such as furniture and doormats. 
*Second raid called "The Rift" – 12-player raid in which players encounter a [[Balrogs|Balrog]] for the first time. Turbine has stressed that this is not the [[Durin's Bane|Balrog from Khazad-dûm]].<ref>[http://lotro.tentonhammer.com/index.php?module=ContentExpress&func=display&ceid=287 Book 11 Preview: The Balrogs are Coming]</ref>
*Two new areas – Tâl Bruinen in the Trollshaws, where [[Gollum]] will be introduced for the first time, and Goblin-town in the [[Misty Mountains]], featured in ''The Hobbit''.

===Book XII: The Ashen Wastes===
The fourth free content update was released on 13 February 2008 in North America; and 14 February 2008 in Europe.

Amarthiel has Laerdan transported to Angmar, where she learns from him under torture where her Ring is. In a brave attempt to save both Laerdan and the ring Narchuil, you are able to get to them before Amarthiel does, despite losing another Ranger. But only half of the ring was found. Laerdan confesses to Elrond he has broken Narchuil in two, and where the other part should be. But then he swears an oath upon [[Varda|Elbereth]] that he will not rest before he has saved his daughter, and leaves the Council.

Updates included ([http://lorebook.lotro.com/wiki/Release_Notes_Book_12_Official complete release notes]):
*The Delving of Frór - A new Monster Play PVE (and PVMP under certain circumstances) area was introduced: An expanse of caves and catacombs located beneath the Ettenmoors.
*The Great Angmar Revamp - A revamp of the most high-level region of the game's current 9 PvE regions. The revamp included the reworking of many quests, areas and other changes, such as new horse routes.

===Book XIII: Doom of the Last-King===
The fifth free content update was released on 24 April 2008 in North America and on 1 May 2008 in Europe.

Trying to find out more about the other half of Narchuil, you are sent to [[Forochel]]. However Amarthiel's forces have already arrived, and are already searching. In an attempt to find the ring before the Angmarim, the player receives help from [[Arvedui]]'s Ghost. In the final chapter, it seems Mordrambor has betrayed Amarthiel; the two start to battle and disappear from view. The player then retrieves the second half of Narchuil and returns it to Rivendell.

Updates included ([http://lorebook.lotro.com/wiki/Release_Notes_Book_13_Official complete release notes]):
*A new playable map area: the Ice Bay of [[Forochel]].
*Fishing - the first of a new system in ''Lord of the Rings Online'', called 'hobbies'.
*New PVMP Monster Healing Class - Orc Defiler.

===Book XIV: The Ring-forges of Eregion===
The sixth free content update was released on 22 July 2008 in North America.  It was released on 24 July 2008 in Europe.

Still seeking to save Narmeleth, Laerdan travels with the two halves of Narchuil to [[Eregion]].  Amarthiel, baiting him in, reclaims Narchuil for herself.  Elrond sends many Heralds of Rivendell to all corners of [[Eriador]] to help him in his search for the lost Ring-lore. But all efforts are too late, for Narchuil has been reforged when the Free People reach Eregion. It quickly becomes clear none are able to withstand Narchuil, until Mordrambor, Amarthiel's former servant, arrives. They go outside, where Mordirith arrives. Mordirith is in power once again, but Amarthiel does not surrender and believes she can defeat him with Narchuil. But Mordirith has the power of the Witch-king and defeats her. Mordrambor claims Narchuil as his own, and when he is about to finish Amarthiel, Laerdan appears. He now knows Mordirith is actually [[Eärnur]], the last King of [[Gondor]]. Mordirith orders Mordrambor to kill Laerdan, after which the two leave. Amarthiel is crying over her father, and set captive by the Free People.

Updates included ([http://lorebook.lotro.com/wiki/Release_Notes_Book_14_Official complete release notes]):
*Added selected sections of [[Eregion]] (Region leading towards the Gates of Moria).

===Book XV: Daughter of Strife===
The seventh free content update was released on 18 November 2008.  This update was released in tandem with the Mines of Moria expansion for players who did not purchase the expansion release.

With the death of her father, Narmeleth is once again freed from the evil influence of Amarthiel.  Narmeleth becomes a captive of the Free Peoples and she sacrifices herself in order to help defeat Mordrambor and aid the Free Peoples.  The book ends bittersweet with Narmeleth's redemption and her death.

Updates included ([http://lorebook.lotro.com/wiki/Category:Epic_-_Vol._I,_Book_15:_Daughter_of_Strife_Quests Epic - Vol. I, Book 15: Daughter of Strife Quests epic]):
*Added the zone of Eregion expanding on the selected sections from Book 14.  The zone does not include the Hollin Gate leading to the Black Pool.

==Trailers==
<youtube>bMCflZ6sdt0</youtube>
<youtube>nuffMndkrys</youtube>
<youtube>WooWhB5U984</youtube>

{{notes}}
{{references}}
{{lotro}}
{{Videogames}}

{{title|italics}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:Lord of the Rings Online Shadows of Angmar}}
[[Category:Microsoft Windows games]]
[[Category:The Lord of the Rings Online|Shadows of Angmar]]
[[Category:Turbine games]]