{{short description|2024 anime film}}
{{film infobox
| name = The Lord of the Rings: The War of the Rohirrim
| image = The Lord of the Rings The War of the Rohirrim Theatrical Poster.jpg
| caption = Theatrical poster
| director = [[Kenji Kamiyama]]
| writers = Jeffrey Addiss<br>Will Matthews
| screenplay = Phoebe Gittins<br>Arty Papageorgiou<br>(screenplay)<br>Jeffrey Addiss<br>Will Matthews<br>(story)
| basedon = ''[[The Lord of the Rings]]'' by [[J.R.R. Tolkien]]
| producer = Joseph Chou
| starring = [[Brian Cox]]<br>[[Gaia Wise]]<br>[[Luke Pasqualino]]<br>[[Miranda Otto]]<br>[[Laurence Ubong Williams]]
| narrator = [[Miranda Otto]]
| cinematography = 
| editing = 
| music = [[Stephen Gallagher]]
| animator = 
| studio = [[New Line Cinema]]<br/>Warner Bros. Animation<br/>Sola Entertainment
| distributor = [[Warner Bros.]]
| released = [[13 December]] [[2024]]
| runtime = 130 minutes <ref>[https://programme.annecyfestival.com/en/movies/20233387 ‘Lord of the Rings: The War of the Rohirrim’, Annecy Film Festival]</ref>
| country = United States<br/>Japan
| language = English
| budget = 
| gross = 
| website = 
| imdb_id = 14824600
}}
'''''The Lord of the Rings: The War of the Rohirrim''''' is an  anime fantasy film based on the ''[[The Lord of the Rings]]'' books by [[J.R.R. Tolkien]]. The film, set 250 years before the events of ''The Lord of the Rings'', is primarily based on [[The Lord of the Rings Appendices|the Appendices]] and covers the story of [[Helm|Helm Hammerhand]], and the history behind the founding of [[Hornburg|Helm's Deep]].

==Synopsis==
The film is set around 250 years before the events of ''[[The Lord of the Rings]]'', covering the period of time when [[Helm|Helm Hammerhand]] was [[Kings of Rohan|King of Rohan]]. Helm was King of Rohan from {{TA|2741}} to {{TA|2759|n}}.<ref>{{App|Eorl}}</ref>

According to Deadline: "''The War of the Rohirrim focuses on a character from the book’s appendix, the mighty King of Rohan, Helm Hammerhand, and a legendary battle which helped shaped Middle-earth heading into LOTR. The anime pic will expand the untold story behind the fortress of Helm’s Deep, delving into the life and bloodsoaked times of Hammerhand. Overall, the movie is a companion piece to New Line’s LOTR trilogy and is set roughly 250 years before that movie during the third age''".<ref>{{webcite|articleurl=https://deadline.com/2021/06/lord-of-the-rings-anime-film-the-war-of-the-rohirrim-new-line-1234773024/|articlename=‘The Lord Of The Rings’ Goes On: Anime Film ‘The War Of The Rohirrim’ In Works At New Line|author=Anthony D'Alessandro|dated=10 June 2021|website=[https://deadline.com Deadline]|accessed=30 December 2021}}</ref>

==Plot==
{{Rewrite}}
[[Éowyn]] narrates the tale of [[Helm's daughter|Héra]], a shieldmaiden of [[Rohan]], daughter of King [[Helm Hammerhand]], who lived nearly two centuries before [[Bilbo Baggins]] came across the [[One Ring]].

[[Freca]], a Dunlending chieftain, arrives at King Helm's hall accompanied by his son, Wulf, a childhood companion of Héra. Furious upon learning that Héra is to be wed to a noble of [[Gondor]], Freca attempts to compel a union between Wulf and Héra in a bid to seize control of Rohan. Though Wulf harbors genuine feelings for Héra, she has no desire to marry at all. A confrontation between Helm and Freca escalates into a fist-fight outside the hall, during which Helm, with a single blow, unintentionally kills Freca thus earning the name "Hammerhand."

Stricken by grief and rage, Wulf swears vengeance and disappears without a trace. Years later, Héra and her cousin [[Fréaláf]] discover the corpse of a dead Southron warrior—a tamer of [[Oliphaunts]]. Moments later, the warrior’s rabid Oliphaunt emerges and attacks them. Héra cleverly lures the beast to a forest lake, where it is seized and devoured by a lurking [[Watcher in the Water]]. Soon after, she is captured by Targg, one of Freca’s old commanders, and taken to Isengard, now Wulf’s stronghold. There, she learns that Wulf has risen to lead the Dunlendings. In an attempt to stop the coming invasion, Héra offers herself in marriage to Wulf, but is rescued in time by Fréaláf and her lady-in-waiting [[Olwyn]].

Wulf marches on Rohan. Helm, refusing Fréaláf’s counsel to evacuate [[Edoras]] to the refuge of [[Dunharrow]], brands him a coward and banishes him. Helm prepares for war after [[Lord Thorne]] pledges support, but Héra uncovers Thorne’s treachery. He attempts to kill her, but she survives and slays him with the help of her steed, [[Ashere]]. Realizing Helm’s army has been betrayed and outnumbered, Héra leads the people of Edoras to safety at the [[Hornburg]]. In the ensuing battle, Wulf kills Helm’s son [[Haleth (son of Helm)|Haleth]], then captures his brother [[Háma (son of Helm)|Háma]], executing him before Helm’s eyes—ignoring Helm’s plea to take his own life instead. Wulf lays siege to the Hornburg throughout the bitter winter, constructing a massive siege-tower.

Gravely wounded and broken-hearted, Helm begins venturing out under cover of darkness via a secret passage, slaying foes with his bare hands. On one of these night raids, Héra finds him and aids him in defeating a troll. During their return, she witnesses two [[Orc|orcs]] from [[Mordor]] looting rings from the fallen, acting on the orders of [[Sauron|their master]]. Helm escorts her back to the Hornburg, then stays behind to hold off the enemy. He perishes in the snow, upright and unyielding, frozen in death.

Héra sends [[Eagle|an eagle]] bearing her father’s armor to summon Fréaláf. Donning an ancient bridal gown, she rides out to confront Wulf on the siege-tower bridge he has just lowered to storm the Hornburg, issuing a challenge to single combat. Her goal is to buy time for the Rohirrim to escape through a hidden tunnel. She defeats Wulf and demands his surrender. Targg, who had previously urged Wulf to abandon the siege, agrees with her, but Wulf slays him in defiance. At that moment, Fréaláf arrives with reinforcements, bearing Helm’s horn and armor—symbols that terrify the Dunlendings, who believe Helm has returned from the grave. Panic spreads, and the enemy flees. Wulf lunges at Héra, but she kills him by strangling him with a shield strap, thus bringing the war to an end.

Helm’s legacy is immortalized in the naming of [[Helm's Deep]], the valley and fortress of the Hornburg. [[Saruman]] is revealed to be the new master of [[Isengard]], offering friendship to Fréaláf, who is crowned king. Héra, disinterested in ruling, sets off with Olwyn to explore the wider world. Her first new journey brings her to [[Gandalf]], who seeks answers about the orcs she saw and their quest for rings. Éowyn concludes her story, saying that Héra remained fierce and free-hearted to the end of her days.

==Cast==
===Credited===
{| class="wikitable"
! !!Actor!!Role(s)
|-
|1
|[[Brian Cox]]||[[Helm|Helm Hammerhand]]
|-
|2
|[[Gaia Wise]]||[[Helm's daughter|Héra]]
|-
|3
|[[Miranda Otto]]||[[Éowyn]] (narrator)
|-
|4
|[[Luke Pasqualino]]||[[Wulf]]
|-
|5
|[[Lorraine Ashbourne]]||[[Olwyn]]
|-
|6
|[[Shaun Dooley]]||[[Freca]]
|-
|7
|[[Benjamin Wainwright]]||[[Haleth (son of Helm)|Haleth]]
|-
|8
|[[Yazdan Qafouri]]||[[Háma (son of Helm)|Háma]]
|-
|9
|[[Laurence Ubong Williams]]||[[Fréaláf]]
|-
|10
|[[Michael Wildman]]||[[General Targg]]
|-
|11
|Janine Duvitski||[[Old Pennicruik]]
|-
|12
|[[Bilal Hasna]]||[[Lief]]
|-
|13
|[[Jude Akuwudike]]||[[Lord Thorne]]
|-
|14
|[[Billy Boyd]]||[[Shank]]
|-
|15
|[[Dominic Monaghan]]||[[Wrot]]
|-
|16
|Alex Jordan||[[Lord Frygt]]<ref> {{webcite|author=[https://x.com/AlexJordanVO Alex Jordan]|articleurl=https://twitter.com/AEJORDAN/status/1537058197005017089|articlename=I'm excited to announce that I’ll be voicing the character of Lord Frygt in The Lord of the Rings: The War of the Rohirrim. In theaters April 12, 2024. #WarOfTheRohirrim|dated=15 June 2022|website=[https://x.com Twitter]|accessed=}}</ref>
|-
|17
|Bea Dooley||[[Helm's daughter|Young Héra]]
|-
|18
|Elijah Tamati||[[Wulf|Young Wulf]]
|-
|19
|Will Godber||[[Rohirrim|Young Rohan Refugee]]
|-
|20
|[[Christopher Lee]]||[[Saruman]]
|-
|21
|Calum Gittins||[[Dunlendings|Wildman]]
|-
|22
|Matt Beachen||[[Dunharrow]] [[Rohirrim|Captain]]
|-
|23
|Additional Voices||Shane Bartle, Zac Bell, David Cox, Adam Rhys Dee, Daniel Denova, Alison Dowling, Daniel Flynn, Stephen Gledhill, Peter Hambleton, Nick Haverson, Oliver Hembrough, Ronny Jhutti, James Ladanyi, Simon Lawson, Anthony Lewis, Jonathan Magnanti, Gary Martin, Neil McCaul, Naomi McDonald, Carmel McGlone, Joshua Miles, Louie Nixon, Hilary Norris, Fergus O'Donnell, Nigel Pilkington, Lyndee-Jane Rutherford, Stephanie Thomas, Martin Tidy, Gemma Wardle, Rob Alderman, Jay Clare, Daniel Entwistle, Keith Robertson, Gavin Newton, Luke Blick, Lewis Collins, Callum Pearson, Adam Taylor, Dan Hyams, Kieran Milne, Matthew Kennedy
|}

===Uncredited===
{| class="wikitable"
! !!Actor!!Role(s)
|-
|1
|Carlos Damasceno||[[Orcs|Orc Warlord]]
|}

==Production==
===Announcement===
The film was announced on [[10 June]] [[2021]] in the run up to the 20th anniversary of the theatrical release of ''[[The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring]]''. The film had the blessing of Peter Jackson.<ref>Borys Kit, [https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/movies/movie-news/lord-of-the-rings-anime-movie-in-the-works-from-new-line-warner-animation-group-1234965985/ ‘Lord of the Rings’ Anime Movie in the Works From New Line, Warner Bros. Animation], ''Hollywood Reporter'', 10 June 2021.</ref><ref>Peter Jackson, [https://www.facebook.com/PeterJacksonNZ/posts/pfbid02shCnRo9XjY1QsCjEz3KAYXCw8iDF12Jxzs8qaW7ZWcAMGZvH4g3SnwcByhCc2pWzl?__cft__&#x5B;0&#x5D;=AZW22-ulAfDELNXNCYhbrE3demaHNk74oDWBMjLD4Q_Vd1y5s79HAEvZIknAZN__Tu4J7_z5l_ulxcVfMjWuChb84Ex46-ZcaC4cJAwEWMzf5cOJtjPHcZsTdMWTkDR4CNLs9crpi4zljbAIpX6eaoP_pwnORCEPWQnz0M_QD8bv5LDGQb8JpuWZzeqSwaFS39hJlRvqqzgOF62U5EdijL1r&__tn__=%2CO%2CP-R Arise Riders of Rohan], ''Facebook,'' 14 February 2022.</ref><ref>Archyde, [https://webcache.googleusercontent.com/search?q=cache:QI7bYPzjGo4J:https://www.archyde.com/the-lord-of-the-rings-has-peter-jackson-chosen-his-camp-between-the-amazon-series-and-the-future-animated-film-news-series/&cd=1&hl=iw&ct=clnk&gl=il The Lord of the Rings: Has Peter Jackson chosen his camp between the Amazon series and the future animated film? – News Series], ''Archyde'', 15 February 2022.</ref>
{{blockquote|All of us at New Line feel a deep affinity for the extraordinary world J.R.R. Tolkien created, so the opportunity to dive back into Middle-earth with the team at Warner Bros. Animation is a dream come true. Fans know Helm’s Deep as the stage for one of the greatest battles ever put to film and, with many of the same creative visionaries involved and the brilliant Kenji Kamiyama at the helm, we couldn’t be more excited to deliver a fresh vision of its history that will invite global audiences to experience the rich, complex saga of Middle-earth in a thrilling new way.|Carolyn Blackwood, Warner Bros. Pictures Group chief operating officer, and Richard Brener, New Line Cinema president and chief creative officer.<ref name="Variety"/>}}

===Development===
[[New Line Cinema]], currently owned by [[Warner Bros.|Warner Brothers-Discovery]], and the company behind [[The Lord of the Rings (film series)|''The Lord of the Rings'' film series]], announced that they were fast-tracking development of this 2D anime film. Warner Bros. Animation will be partnering with Sola Entertainment, and it was announced also that the film will be directed by [[Kenji Kamiyama]]. The screenplay will be written by Jeffrey Addiss and Will Matthews, with [[Philippa Boyens]] - who worked on both ''[[The Lord of the Rings (film series)|The Lord of the Rings]]'' and ''[[The Hobbit (film series)|The Hobbit]]'' film series -acting as a consultant.<ref name="Variety">{{webcite|articlename=‘Lord of the Rings’ Anime Feature Fast-Tracked by New Line Cinema and Warner Bros. Animation|articleurl=https://variety.com/2021/film/news/lord-of-the-rings-anime-the-war-of-the-rohirrim-new-line-cinema-warner-bros-animation-1234993740/|website=[http://www.variety.com Variety]|dated=10 June 2021|author=Adam B. Vary|accessed=30 December 2021}}</ref> 

In February 2022, it was announced that the script was now being written by Phoebe Gittins, Philipa Boyens' daughter, and her ''[https://www.imdb.com/title/tt12390344/ The Sorrows]'' writing partner Arty Papageorgiou, based on a story by Addiss and Matthews.<ref name="ReleaseDate2" /> It was also announced that special effects company [[Wētā Workshop]], its creative director [[Richard Taylor]], illustrators [[Alan Lee]] and [[John Howe]], and dialect coach Roisin Carty,<ref>Internet Movie Database, '''[https://www.imdb.com/title/tt14824600/?ref_=ttfc_fc_tt ''The Lord of the Rings: The War of the Rohirrim'' (2023).]'''</ref> all having worked on [[Peter Jackson|Peter Jackson's]] Middle-earth film series,<ref name="ReleaseDate2" /><ref name="Cast" /> had joined the film's creative team, with Philippa as executive producer.

Philippa had divulged that Eowyn "passes the tale"<ref name=":0">Demosthenes, [https://www.theonering.net/torwp/2022/06/28/113412-exclusive-philippa-boyens-talks-the-war-of-the-rohrrim-with-theonering-net/ Exclusive: Philippa Boyens talks The War of The Rohirrim with TheOneRing.net], ''TheOneRing.net'', 28 June 2022.</ref> of the "hot-headed" Helm and a "fiery" Héra (the latter moulded on Æthelflæd, who served as a queen and military leader who built forts and led campaigns against Viking attacks on Mercia in the ninth century) and the Dunlendings' historic grievances with the Rohirrim. Philippa said a major focus was the motivation of the "ruthless and clever" Wulf: "What was driving him?" asked Boyens, "Was it just his father demanding that he do this? Was it his ambition?"<ref name=":0" /> Using his father's substantial wealth to acquire the services of Haradrim mercenaries, this results in "quite large-scale battles" before Wulf "commits himself to a course of action he cannot turn away from",<ref name=":0" /> says Boyens. Consistently described as a "bloodsoaked"<ref>Nicole Carpenter, [https://www.polygon.com/22933827/lord-of-the-rings-anime-first-look-release-date Lord of the Rings anime slated for April 2024 release — here’s the first look], '''Polygon''', 14 February 2022.</ref> story, the film shifts into a "ghost story", while Hèra tries to "lead a resistance."<ref name=":0" /> Boyens said Sauron and the Ring are "very peripheral" to the story, and suggested Gondor's own tribulations with the Corsairs would not be featured, but left room for speculation about a cursory role for Saruman,<ref>Demosthenes, [https://www.theonering.net/torwp/2022/03/20/112495-saruman-and-the-war-of-the-rohirrim/ Saruman and The War of the Rohirrim], ''TheOneRing.net'', 20 March 2022.</ref> and teased the presence of Orcs in the White Mountains.<ref name=":0" />

A full trailer has been assumed to air "around October 2023", while a teaser "could come much sooner."<ref>James Osborne, T [https://www.thedigitalfix.com/the-lord-of-the-rings/war-of-the-rohirrim-release-date he Lord of the Rings: War of the Rohirrim release date], ''The Digital Fix'', 27 October 2022.</ref> Warners will show a 65-minute "Behind the Scenes look" At Annecy Film Festival in June 2023.<ref>Melanie Goodfellow, [https://deadline.com/2023/04/annecy-international-film-festival-2023-competition-line-up-1235339347/ Annecy Unveils 2023 Competition Line-Ups & First Details Of Studio Sneak Peek Presentations], ''Deadline'', 27 April 2023.</ref><ref>[https://www.annecyfestival.com/programme/index:plng-100001504116 Annecy Film Festival Programme,] June 2023.</ref>

===Casting===
Voice casting had begun by June 2021,when executive producer Jason DeMarco confirmed that hiring for voice artists was underway.<ref name="WGTC">{{webcite|articleurl=https://wegotthiscovered.com/movies/lord-rings-producer-shares-excitement-war-rohirrim/|articlename=Lord Of The Rings Producer Shares Excitement For The War Of The Rohirrim|author=Scott Campbell|dated=14 June 2021|website=[https://wegotthiscovered.com We Got This Covered]|accessed=30 December 2021}}</ref> Philippa personally called Otto to have her narrate,<ref name=":1">Pierra Willix, [https://metro.co.uk/2023/05/18/lord-of-the-rings-miranda-otto-hasnt-seen-rings-of-power-yet-18769263/ The Lord of the Rings star Miranda Otto thinks it might be strange for her to watch The Rings of Power], ''Metro UK'', 18 May 2023.</ref> while Cox was hired in-part because she heard of his performance in ''Titus Andronicus''.<ref name=":0" /> 

In June 2022, the main voice cast was announced.<ref name="Cast">
{{webcite|articleurl=https://deadline.com/2022/06/lord-of-the-rings-the-war-of-the-rohirrim-brian-cox-miranda-otto-1235045883/|articlename=‘The Lord Of The Rings: The War Of The Rohirrim’: Anime Voice Cast Counts Brian Cox, Gaia Wise, Miranda Otto & More|author=By Anthony D'Alessandro|dated=15 June 2022|website=[https://deadline.com/ Deadline Hollywood]|accessed=28 October 2022}}</ref> At least some of the voice-work was already completed by that point,<ref name=":0" /><ref>Gravemaster, [https://redanianintelligence.com/2022/06/16/the-witcher-actor-joins-the-lord-of-the-rings-war-of-the-rohirrim-animated-film/ The Witcher Actor Joins ‘The Lord of the Rings: War of the Rohirrim’ Animated Film], ''Redanian Intelligence,'' 16 June 2022.</ref> although in May 2023 Otto said she is due to attend some more sessions "in the next six to 12 months."<ref name=":1" /> Peter Jackson called the cast "amazing."<ref>Peter Jackson, [https://www.facebook.com/PeterJacksonNZ/posts/pfbid0Z2Wjc5yQXndV5fpFtPFvNDjMQXPTpgf8BSm4ecTegUXdBLRQyCWkAwiEo5QCkju2l?__cft__%5B0%5D=AZUcss53qvVtLRPUjy1n1IelD2TSvlhQL9YCk9fJLdeeODjVePJYDPrNpeiw0Dq90zQTraJT9ZsXVusCqWrL1ktBvY0LERkNEDnl5mKsiUPO4etZcpzLXH9UxvaIlIbGmu_6yHHpEIMvdV_RqKaKg4Mw9C5M6NFKc6YBaRpjG34bfg_sObtdqmNx509gKoNdHIXFdklaeQgYvc6883crfHQD&__tn__=%2CO%2CP-R War of the Rohirrim - Casting News], ''Facebook'', 15 June 2022.</ref>

===Announcement Reaction===
When it was announced, [[Shaun Gunner]], Current Chair of [[The Tolkien Society]], said in a statement that "''Tolkien fans will be delighted to see more of Middle-earth on screen. In The Lord of the Rings film trilogy we got a hint of the wider history that underpins Tolkien’s creation, and the Rohirrim are no exception. I’m excited to see a different interpretation of Tolkien’s works, and in a different visual style. I hope it brings even more people to reading Tolkien’s creation—it will certainly resend me back to the book!''"<ref>{{webcite|website=TS|articleurl=https://www.tolkiensociety.org/2021/06/the-war-of-the-rohirrim-anime-film-in-development/|articlename=“The War of the Rohirrim” anime film in development|author=Daniel Helen|dated=10 June 2021|accessed=30 December 2021}}</ref>

==Release==
The film was released theatrically on [[13 December]] [[2024]] in the USA.<ref>Anthony D'Alessandro, [https://deadline.com/2023/08/lord-of-the-rings-war-of-the-rohirrim-delayed-2024-1235527601/ ‘Lord Of The Rings: The War Of The Rohirrim’ Release Delayed Until December 2024], ''DEADLINE''''',''' 2 January 2024.</ref> It was distributed by [[Warner Bros.]]<ref name="ReleaseDate2">{{webcite|website=|articleurl=https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/movies/movie-news/lord-of-the-rings-anime-movie-release-date-1235093505/|articlename= "Lord of the Rings Anime Movie Sets 2024 Release Date"|author=Couch Aaron|dated=15 February 2022|accessed=12 July 2022}}</ref>

{{References}}
{{Screen}}
{{title|italics}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:Lord of the Rings War of the Rohririm}}
[[Category:Films]]
[[Category:The Lord of the Rings: The War of the Rohirrim]]
[[de:Der Herr der Ringe: Die Schlacht der Rohirrim]]
[[fi:The Lord of the Rings: The War of the Rohirrim]]