{{incomplete}}{{scene
|name=The Sword that Was Broken
|film=[[The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring]]
| image = The Lord of the Rings - The Fellowship of the Ring - Narsil Broken.png
|number=21 (theatrical) <br>
        25 (extended)
|duration=
|event=[[Aragorn]] voices his doubts about his own strength and fate
|characters=[[Aragorn]], [[Boromir]], [[Arwen]]
|previous=[[The Fate of the Ring]]
|next=[[The Evenstar (The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring scene)|The Evenstar]]
}}
'''The Sword that Was Broken''' is the twenty-first scene of ''[[The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring]]'' and the twenty-fifth of [[The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring (extended edition)|''The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring'' (extended edition)]]. This scene was extended in the latter edition.

==Synopsis==
As [[Aragorn]] sits and reads near the plinth holding the shards of [[Narsil]], [[Boromir]] approaches and gravely studies a painting showing [[Isildur]] raising his broken sword at [[Sauron]]. He notices the Aragorn and asks him who he is. In response, Aragorn tells him that he is a friend of [[Gandalf]]. Boromir smiles and turns towards the broken blade. He picks up the hilt with a sense of wonder and inspects it, but notices Aragorn staring at him, and hastily drops it, claiming it is "no more than a broken heirloom". 

After Boromir departs, Aragorn picks up the hilt and returns it to its place on the plinth. [[Arwen]] approaches and says "Why do you fear the past? You are Isildur's heir, not Isildur himself. You are not bound to his fate." Aragorn voices his concerns about his strength, but she reassures him that he will defeat the same evil faced by Isildur when his time comes.

==Differences==
This scene was almost wholly invented for the film.

*Aragorn carries the shards of Narsil with him.
*It is doubtful that Boromir would treat the shards of Narsil in such a flippant manner, as they would still be of great importance to a Man of Gondor.
*While Aragorn does not wish to handle the Ring in the book, he does not have the self-doubt shown in this scene.
*Boromir would not treat the shards of Narsil so roughly. He wanted the sword to return to Gondor to fend off the forces of evil.
[[Category:The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring scenes|25]]