{{disambig-two|the seventh episode of ''[[The Lord of the Rings: The Rings of Power]]''|emblem of [[Mordor]]|[[Eye of Sauron]]}}
{{Incomplete}}
{{episode infobox
| name=The Eye
| image = The Lord of the Rings The Rings of Power - The Eye.jpg
| caption=
| director=[[Charlotte Brändström]]
| writer=[[Jason Cahill]]
| screenplay=
| basedon=
| producer=
| starring=
| narrator=
| cinematography=
| editing=
| music=[[Bear McCreary]]<br/>Main Title by [[Howard Shore]]
| animator=
| studio=[[Amazon Studios]]
| distributor=
| released=[[7 October]] [[2022]]
| runtime=72 minutes
| country=
| language=
| budget=
| gross=
| website=
| imdb_id=11609046
| gallery=The Rings of Power (TV series)
| previous=[[Udûn (episode)|Udûn]]
| next=[[Alloyed]]
}}

{{Quote|[[Men|Survivors]] of a [[Mount Doom|cataclysm]] try to find [[Pelargir|safety]]; the [[Harfoots]] confront [[Mystics|evil]]; [[Durin VI|Durin]] is torn between [[Elrond|friendship]] and [[Durin III|duty]]; [[Adar (The Rings of Power)|Adar]] considers a new [[Mordor|name]].|Official Synopsis, [[Amazon Studios]]}}

'''The Eye''' is the seventh episode of [[Amazon Studios]]'s television series, ''[[The Lord of the Rings: The Rings of Power]]'', released on [[7 October]], [[2022]].

== Synopsis ==
===Southlands===
[[Galadriel]] wakes up in the aftermath of the [[Mount Doom|Orodruin]] eruption covered in ash and lit in a fiery red glow. The ash-covered dead surround her and cries fill the air. She finds [[Theo]] in the smoke. [[Isildur]] is seen attempting to pull Valandil out from under a collapsed roof. Valandil informs him that Ontamo was in the building when it collapsed. [[Tar-Míriel|Queen Regent Míriel]] helps Isildur lift the roof, freeing Valandil and revealing the body of their friend. As the three attempt to rescue people from a burning building, the structure collapses, trapping Isildur inside, presumably dead. As the Southlanders and Númenóreans retreat, [[Elendil]] asks for news of his son. It becomes clear that Miriel has lost her sight.

Galadriel dispenses wisdom to Theo on their journey to the Númenórean camp, and receives some from him in turn. As the Númenóreans try to gather their horses into camp, Berek fights against his lead. Elendil is convinced to let him go but states that he should never have let "the elf" on board. Galadriel and Theo arrive at camp and are reunited with [[Bronwyn]], [[Arondir]], [[Halbrand]], and all the others. Elendil consults Miriel and they prepare to return to Númenor, leaving behind a garrison to find a place for the Southlanders to resettle safely. Miriel wears her eyes bandaged. She declares that Númenor will return, much to the dismay of Elendil. They set sail across the sea again.
Galadriel and Halbrand ride for Lindon to cries of "Strength to the King!" from the Southlanders. Galadriel bequeaths her Númenórean blade to Theo.

===Harfoots===
The [[Harfoots]] arrive at the [[Grove]] to find glowing rocks presumably shot from a volcano in the ground. [[The Stranger]] attempts to do something to the blighted tree, and the Harfoots gather around, believing he is going to save the tree like he saved them from the wolves in an earlier episode. Instead it drops a large limb on [[Elanor Brandyfoot]] and Dilly and the Harfoots view a confused Stranger with suspicion. [[Sadoc Burrows]] encourages the Stranger to leave, and he does.

They awake the next morning to find the grove entirely restored and a bumper crop. While harvesting snails or crawdads in a stream, [[Poppy Proudfellow]] finds an enormous man-footprint. The [[Mystics]] have been tracking the Harfoots and find evidence of The Stranger's passage through the Grove. When Nori tries to point them in the wrong direction, they loom over her. [[Largo Brandyfoot]] threatens them with a torch but they magically redirect the fire to burn the Harfoots' wagons. Largo then encourages and supports the Harfoots to pick up their pieces and carry on. Nori, Poppy, Marigold, Malva and Sadoc all support going to warn The Stranger that the Mystics are coming for him.

===Khazad-dûm===
[[Elrond]] pleads his case before Durin III, offering grain, meat, and timber from the Elven forests for five-hundred years in exchange for [[Mithril]] mines. Durin III rejects the offer, saying he will not risk dwarven lives in the elves pursuit of eternal life in Middle-earth. Durin IV breaks the news to Elrond, who leaves his sample of Mithril on the table beside the diseased Lindon leaf. As the two items lay side by side, the blight flows away and the leaf is restored. Encouraged by Disa, Durin IV yells for Elrond to come back.

Durin IV takes Elrond to a blocked mineshaft and they share friendly conversation as Durin breaks through to reveal a chamber filled with veins of mithril. Elrond gasps in awe and turns to look back on is friend, only to find that King Durin III has caught them. The king has Elrond thrown out and disowns his son when the younger Durin says he views Elrond as a brother.

Disa inspires Durin IV with the promise that he will one day be king, no matter what his short-sighted father says. Durin III throws the now-golden Lindon leaf into the Mithril pit and orders it sealed up. As the leaf lands on the ground and burns in the heat, a [[Durin's Bane|balrog]] erupts out of the depths.

===Mordor===
The Southlands, choked in ash and flame, is now the abode of orcs, evil Men, and [[Adar (The Rings of Power|Adar]]. Adar declares that it is no longer the Southlands, and a title card on the screen burns away the name "Southlands", transforming it into "[[Mordor]]".

== Cast ==
=== Credited ===
:''In order of appearance'' (in episode credits)
{| class="wikitable"
|- bgcolor="#CCCCCC"
! Actor !! Role
|-
| [[Morfydd Clark]] || [[Galadriel]]
|-
| [[Tyroe Muhafidin]] || [[Theo]]
|-
| [[Maxim Baldry]]|| [[Isildur]]
|-
| [[Alex Tarrant]] || [[Valandil (The Rings of Power)|Valandil]]
|-
| [[Cynthia Addai-Robinson]]|| [[Tar-Míriel|Queen Regent Míriel]]
|-
| [[Anthony Crum]] || [[Ontamo]]
|-
| [[Megan Richards]] || [[Poppy Proudfellow]]
|-
| [[Markella Kavenagh]] || [[Elanor Brandyfoot|Elanor "Nori" Brandyfoot]]
|-
| [[Daniel Weyman]] || [[The Stranger]]
|-
| [[Sara Zwangobani]] || [[Marigold Brandyfoot]]
|-
| [[Beau Cassidy]] || [[Dilly Brandyfoot]]
|-
| [[Dylan Smith]] || [[Largo Brandyfoot]]
|-
| [[Lenny Henry|Sir Lenny Henry]]|| [[Sadoc Burrows]]
|-
| [[Thusitha Jayasundera]] || [[Malva Meadowgrass|Malva]]
|-
| [[Maxine Cunliffe]] || [[Vilma]]
|-
| [[Robert Aramayo]] || [[Elrond]]
|-
| [[Owain Arthur]] || [[Durin IV|Prince Durin IV]]
|-
| [[Peter Mullan]] || [[Durin III|King Durin III]]
|-
| [[Sophia Nomvete]] || [[Disa|Princess Disa]]
|-
| [[Lloyd Owen]] || [[Elendil|Captain Elendil]]
|-
| [[Nazanin Boniadi]] || [[Bronwyn]]
|-
| [[Ismael Cruz Córdova]] || [[Arondir]]
|-
| [[Charlie Vickers]] || [[Halbrand]]
|-
| [[Joseph Mawle]] || [[Adar (The Rings of Power)|Adar]]
|-
| [[Geoff Morrell]] || [[Waldreg]]
|-
| [[James Munro]] || [[Dwarves|Dwarf Lord One]]
|-
| [[Michael Jones|Mike Jones]] || [[Dwarves|Dwarf Lord Two]]
|-
| [[Jed Brophy]] || [[Orc-hunters|Hunter Orc]]
|-
| [[Robert Strange]] || [[Orcs|Other Orc]]
|-
| [[Edith Poor]] || [[Mystics|The Nomad]]
|-
| [[Kali Kopae]] || [[Mystics|The Ascetic]]
|-
| [[Bridie Sisson]] || [[The Dweller]]
|}

== Trivia ==
Below is a list of trivia from Amazon's "X-Ray" feature that accompanied the episode.
* Scene 2 - "Most of the details and elaborations told herein are derived from '[[The Lord of the Rings]]', its prologue entitled '[[Concerning Hobbits]]', and its [[Appendices]], [[Appendix A|A]] through [[Appendix F|F]], where the intrepid traveler may journey to discover even farther horizons."

== Production ==

== Differences ==

== Reception ==

== External links ==
* [https://rop.digitaltolkien.com/S1E7/ The Eye] at ROP Data
* [https://ringswrapup.com/020-missing-persons/ Episode analysis on Rings of Power Wrap-Up] (with [[Alan Sisto]], [[Sara Brown]], and [[James Tauber]])
* [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0nWfER50CLE&ab_channel=RingsandRealms Episode analysis on Rings & Realms] (with [[Corey Olsen]])
* [https://bearmccreary.com/the-lord-of-the-rings-episode-107/ Scoring The Eye] by [[Bear McCreary]]

{{references}}
{{rop-episodes}}

{{title}}

[[Category:The Rings of Power (TV series) episodes|07]]

[[fi:Silmä (jakso)]]