{{short description|2001 film adaptation}}
{{Sources}}
{{disambig-more|The Fellowship of the Ring|[[The Fellowship of the Ring (disambiguation)]]}}
{{film infobox
| image = The Lord of the Rings - The Fellowship of the Ring - Ensemble poster.jpg
| caption = 
| name = The Fellowship of the Ring
| director = [[Peter Jackson]]
| producer = Peter Jackson<br>[[Barrie M. Osborne]]<br>[[Tim Sanders]]<br>[[Fran Walsh]]
| writer = '''Book:'''<br>[[J.R.R. Tolkien]]<br>'''Screenplay:'''<br>[[Frances Walsh]]<br>[[Philippa Boyens]]<br>Peter Jackson<br>Stephen Sinclair
| narrator =
| starring =
| music = [[Howard Shore]]
| cinematography = [[Andrew Lesnie]]
| editing = [[John Gilbert]]
| studio = [[WingNut Films]]<br>[[New Line Cinema]]
| distributor = [[New Line Cinema]]
| released = [[December 19]]th, [[2001]]
| runtime = '''Theatrical:'''<br>178 min.<br>'''Extended Edition:'''<br>208 min.
| country = New Zealand & USA
| language = English
| budget = $94 million
| website = [http://www.lordoftherings.net Official website]
| imdb_id = 0120737
}}
'''''The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring''''' is the first film of [[Peter Jackson]]'s [[The Lord of the Rings (film series)|''The Lord of the Rings'' film series]]. It is directed by Peter Jackson, while it's screenplay is written by Peter Jackson, [[Philippa Boyens]], [[Fran Walsh]] and Stephen Sinclair. 

The film retells the adventures of the [[Fellowship of the Ring]], taking its story from the first part, ''[[The Fellowship of the Ring]]'', and the first chapter of ''[[The Two Towers]].''

It is the first film of Peter Jackson's film trilogy, and it was filmed simultaneously on various locations in [[New Zealand]]. With a budget of U.S. $180 million, it is one of the most expensive movies production in history of cinema. Principal photography took 14 months and postproduction continued long after that. The film premiered at Odeon Leicester Squareon, in London, in [[10 December]] [[2001]]. It was followed by ''[[The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers]]'' in [[2002]].

==Synopsis==
{{Expansion}}
[[Sauron]], the dark lord, has awakened and threatens to conquer [[Middle-earth]]. To stop this ancient evil once and for all, Frodo Baggins must destroy [[the One Ring]] in the fires of [[Mount Doom]]. [[Men]], [[Hobbits]], a [[Wizards|Wizard]], an [[Elves|Elf]] and a [[Dwarves|Dwarf]] form a fellowship to help him on his quest.

==Plot==
===Prologue===
In the [[Second Age]] of [[Middle-earth]], great [[Rings of Power]] were forged. [[Three Rings|Three]] were given to the lords of [[Elves]], [[Seven Rings|seven]] were given to the lords of the [[Dwarves]], and [[Nine Rings|nine]] were given to the Kings of [[Men]]. However, the [[Sauron|Dark Lord Sauron]] had secretly forged the [[The One Ring|One Ring]] in the fires of [[Mount Doom]], and had imparted great portion of his power into the One Ring to dominate the other Rings and rule Middle-earth. 

After becoming wise to the Dark Lord's scheme, Men and Elves formed an [[Last Alliance of Elves and Men|Alliance]] and battled Sauron's forces in [[Mordor]]. In the battle, [[Elendil]], the King of the Men of [[Gondor]], was slain while attempting to attack Sauron. Elendil's son [[Isildur]] then took up his father's broken sword, [[Narsil]], and severed Sauron's fingers, which removed the Ring from the Dark Lord's hand. Being separated from the Ring caused Sauron's spirit to depart his bodily form, and it seemed that the Alliance of Men and Elves was successful in defeating him.

After the battle, Isildur followed the Elf [[Elrond]] to the [[Cracks of Doom]], where Elrond implored him to cast the Ring into the Mountain's fires and destroy it. However, Isildur refused and kept the Ring for himself. The Ring's influence corrupted Isildur, and he was later slain while walking into a river flee an [[Orcs|Orc]] ambush. The Ring fell into the river and was lost for hundreds of years until it was found by [[Gollum]], who owned it for several centuries. The Ring later abandoned Gollum and was found by a Hobbit named [[Bilbo Baggins]].

===Leaving the Shire===
Sixty years later in [[The Shire|the Shire]], where Bilbo dwelt with his nephew, [[Frodo Baggins]], Bilbo held a birthday celebration and mysteriously disappeared during the festivities. Bilbo was followed to his home in [[Bag End]] by his friend, the [[Wizards|Wizard]] [[Gandalf]]. Gandalf recognized that Bilbo had used the One Ring to disappear, and managed to convince the Hobbit to depart for [[Rivendell]] and leave the One Ring in Frodo's care. Some time later, after traveling to [[Minas Tirith]] and poring over tomes concerning the Ring , Gandalf returned to The Shire and informed Frodo of the Ring's evil nature. Gandalf then warned Frodo to leave the Shire and, after catching Frodo's gardener [[Samwise Gamgee]] eavesdropping on their conversation, sent the Hobbits away for their own safety.

After departing, Frodo and Sam were met by the Hobbits [[Meriadoc Brandybuck|Meriadoc "Merry" Brandybuck]] and [[Peregrin Took|Peregrin "Pippin" Took]], who had absconded with some of [[Farmer Maggot]]'s vegetables. Merry and Pippin joined Frodo and Sam on their journey to [[Bree]], where they are to meant to meet Gandalf. However, the journey was not without peril, as the Hobbits encountered a [[Nazgûl]] who had been sent by Sauron to search for the Ring. They narrowly managed to evade the Ring Wraith, and continued on their way.

After having arrived in Bree, the Hobbits enter an inn, [[The Prancing Pony]], and ask for Gandalf, but the Wizard was nowhere to be found. The Hobbits instead encountered a mysterious [[Rangers of the North|Ranger]] called [[Strider (Aragorn)]]. The Ranger promised to escort them to [[Rivendell]] and, on their way to the Elven dwelling, the group rested on [[Weathertop]]. However, the secrecy of their movements was spoiled by Merry and Pippin starting a fire to cook a meal, which drew the attention of the Ring Wraiths. In the ensuing battle, Frodo is grievously wounded by the [[Morgul blade]] of a Nazgûl known as the [[Witch-king]].

While gathering herbs to treat Frodo's festering wound, Aragorn encounters his beloved Elf [[Arwen]]. She takes Frodo into her care and rides with him toward Rivendell to receive Elven medicine. During the journey, she is pursued on horseback by a group of Ring Wraiths. Arriving at the [[Ford of Bruinen]], she summons the waters of the river, which sweep the Nazgûl away in a flood.

===The Council of Elrond===
After being healed by the Elves in Rivendell, Frodo met with Gandalf, who had been held captive by the Wizard [[Saruman]] in [[Isengard]]. After learning of Saruman's betrayal, Arwen's father Elrond decided against keeping the Ring in Rivendell. Elrond then held a [[Council of Elrond|Council]] of prominent Elves, Men, and Dwarves, who had all serendipitously arrived in Rivendell for various purposes unrelated to the Ring, as well as Frodo and Gandalf. 

After some deliberation, the Council decided that the Ring must be destroyed in the fires of Mount Doom. Amidst an argument concerning what race would be responsible for the Ring's caretaking, Frodo volunteered to take the Ring to Mordor. After accepting this responsibility, he was joined by Gandalf, the Elf [[Legolas]], the Dwarf [[Gimli]], the Men [[Boromir]] and Aragorn, as well as fellow Hobbits Merry, Pippin, and Sam. The nine companions thus formed the [[Fellowship of the Ring]].

===Moria===
Before Frodo's departure, Bilbo, who now lived in Rivendell, gave Frodo his sword [[Sting]] and a [[Mithril-coat]]. After departing from Rivendell, the Fellowship travelled toward the [[Gap of Rohan]]. After discovering the path to the Gap to be infested with Saruman's spies, they instead set off over the mountain pass of [[Caradhras]]. Having correctly deduced their path, Saruman summoned a great storm that drove the Fellowship into the [[Moria|Mines of Moria]]. After managing to open the [[Doors of Durin]] to enter the Mines, the Fellowship was attacked by the [[Watcher in the Water]], a tentacled water monster, who blocked off the entrance with the Fellowship inside. This left them no choice but to continue through the mines to the exit on the other side of the Mountain.

After finding Moria to be filled with dead Dwarves, many of whom were Gimli's kin, Pippin accidentally pushed a skeleton into a well, which caused a great deal of noise and drew the attention of the Orcs within the Mine who, joined by a massive [[Cave-trolls|cave troll]], mounted an attack on the Fellowship. The nine companions managed to hold the onslaught off for a time and, after a deep rumbling reverberated through the [[Balin's Tomb|tomb]] in which they were battling, the Orcs fled. The danger had not yet subsided, as they came to find that the rumbling was that of the [[Balrogs|Balrog]] [[Durin's Bane]], an ancient demonic [[Maiar]] that served [[Morgoth]] in the [[War of Wrath]]. 

Imploring the rest of the Fellowship to flee, Gandalf faced the Balrog on the [[Bridge of Khazad-dûm]]. Gandalf managed to shield his companions from the Balrog's attack, and collapsed the bridge upon which Durin's Bane stood. However, as the Balrog fell into the chasm below, it lashed out with its fiery whip, which grasped Gandalf's knees and dragged him into the abyss with it.

===Lothlórien===
The Fellowship, devastated by Gandalf's apparent death, continued on their journey until they reached [[Lothlórien]], a woodland realm ruled by the Elf [[Galadriel]]. Galadriel met privately with Frodo, who glimpsed into her [[Mirror of Galadriel|Mirror]] and beheld a vision in which Sauron was successful in his domination of Middle-earth. After receiving Galadriel's council, Frodo grasped the full gravity of his quest, and that only he could bring the Ring to Mount Doom.

After resting, the Fellowship prepared to depart from Lothlórien, and Galadriel gave them gifts to aid in their journey. These gifts included Elven cloaks for the entire party, abow of the [[Galadhrim]] for Legolas, daggers for Merry and Pippin, rope for Sam, three hairs from her head for Gimli, and the [[Phial of Galadriel]] for Frodo. Galadriel's husband [[Celeborn]] also gave Aragorn a knife.

Meanwhile, in Isengard, Saruman summoned a force of [[Uruk-hai]] to seek out and destroy the Fellowship.

===The breaking of the Fellowship===
After receiving their gifts from Galadriel, the Fellowship traveled by river to [[Parth Galen]]. While Frodo wandered the area, he was confronted by Boromir who, as Lady Galadriel had warned, tried to take the Ring from the Hobbit, but Frodo managed to escape. The Fellowship was then ambushed by a group of Saruman's Uruk-hai. As the Uruk-hai attempted to abduct the Hobbits, Boromir broke free of the Ring's power and protected Merry and Pippin, but was slain Uruk-Hai captain, [[Lurtz]]. After Boromir's death, Merry and Pippin were taken captive by the Uruk-hai. Aragorn arrived at the scene of Boromir's battle and killed Lurtz. Aragorn then comforted Boromir as he died, and promised to help the people of Gondor in the coming [[War of the Ring|War]]. 

Having witnessed the corrupting power of the Ring, Frodo left to travel to Mordor alone.  Refusing to allow him to journey along, Sam joined him on his journey and made good on his promise to Gandalf to look after Frodo. Legolas, Aragorn, and Gimli set out to rescue Merry and Pippin from the Uruk-hai while Frodo and Sam went alone toward Mordor.

==Scenes==
#[[Prologue: One Ring to Rule Them All...]] **
#[[Concerning Hobbits (scene)|Concerning Hobbits]] *
#[[The Shire (scene)|The Shire]] **
#[[Very Old Friends]] **
#[[A Long-expected Party (scene)|A Long-expected Party]] **
#[[Farewell Dear Bilbo]]
#[[Keep It Secret, Keep It Safe (scene)|Keep It Secret, Keep It Safe]]
#[[The Account of Isildur]]
#[[At the Green Dragon]] *
#[[The Shadow of the Past (scene)|The Shadow of the Past]]
#[[The Passing of the Elves (scene)|The Passing of the Elves]] *
#[[Saruman the White (scene)|Saruman the White]]
#[[A Short Cut to Mushrooms (scene)|A Short Cut to Mushrooms]]
#[[Bucklebury Ferry (scene)|Bucklebury Ferry]]
#[[At the Sign of The Prancing Pony (scene)|At the Sign of The Prancing Pony]]
#[[The Nazgûl (scene)|The Nazgûl]]
#[[The Midgewater Marshes]] *
#[[The Spoiling of Isengard]]
#[[A Knife in the Dark (scene)|A Knife in the Dark]]
#[[The Caverns of Isengard (scene)|The Caverns of Isengard]]
#[[Flight to the Ford (scene)|Flight to the Ford]] **
#[[Rivendell (scene)|Rivendell]]
#[[Many Meetings (scene)|Many Meetings]]
#[[The Fate of the Ring]]
#[[The Sword that Was Broken]] **
#[[The Evenstar (The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring scene)|The Evenstar]]
#[[The Council of Elrond (scene)|The Council of Elrond]] **
#[[Gilraen's Memorial]] *
#[[Bilbo's Gifts]]
#[[The Departure of The Fellowship]] *
#[[The Ring Goes South (scene)|The Ring Goes South]] **
#[[The Pass of Caradhras]] **
#[[Moria (scene)|Moria]] **
#[[A Journey in the Dark (scene)|A Journey in the Dark]] **
#[[Balin's Tomb (scene)|Balin's Tomb]] **
#[[The Bridge of Khazad-dûm (scene)|The Bridge of Khazad-dûm]]
#[[Lothlórien (scene)|Lothlórien]] **
#[[Caras Galadhon (scene)|Caras Galadhon]] **
#[[The Mirror of Galadriel (scene)|The Mirror of Galadriel]] **
#[[The Fighting Uruk-hai]]
#[[Farewell to Lórien (scene)|Farewell to Lórien]] **
#[[The Great River (scene)|The Great River]] **
#[[Parth Galen (scene)|Parth Galen]]
#[[The Breaking of the Fellowship (scene)|The Breaking of the Fellowship]] **
#[[The Departure of Boromir (scene)|The Departure of Boromir]]
#[[The Road Goes Ever On... (scene)|The Road Goes Ever On...]]
#Credits
#Official Fan Club Credits *

<nowiki>*</nowiki> denotes a scene only available in the Extended Edition cut of the film.<br />
<nowiki>**</nowiki> denotes a scene which includes extended content only available in the Extended Edition cut of the film.

==Cast==
{| class="wikitable mw-collapsible"
|- style="background: var(--tg-color-surface-2);" 
!Actor!!Role
|-
|[[Alan Howard]]||[[One Ring|Voice of the Ring]]
|-
|[[Noel Appleby]]||[[Everard Proudfoot]]
|-
|[[Sean Astin]]||[[Samwise Gamgee|Sam]]
|-
|[[Sala Baker]]||[[Sauron]]
|-
|[[Sean Bean]]||[[Boromir]]
|-
|[[Cate Blanchett]]||[[Galadriel]]
|-
|[[Orlando Bloom]]||[[Legolas]]
|-
|[[Billy Boyd]]||[[Peregrin Took|Pippin]]
|-
|[[Peter Corrigan]]||[[Otho Sackville-Baggins|Otho]] (Extended Edition only)
|-
|[[Marton Csokas]]||[[Celeborn]]
|-
|[[Lori Dungey]]||[[Mrs Bracegirdle|Mrs. Bracegirdle]] (Extended Edition only)
|-
|[[Megan Edwards]]||[[Mrs Proudfoot|Mrs. Proudfoot]]
|-
|[[Michael Elsworth]]||[[Gondorians|Gondorian Archivist]]
|-
|[[Mark Ferguson]]||[[Gil-galad]]
|-
|[[Norman Forsey]]||[[Hamfast Gamgee|Gaffer Gamgee]] (Extended Edition only)
|-
|[[Ian Holm]]||[[Bilbo Baggins|Bilbo]]
|-
|[[William Johnson]]||[[Old Noakes]] (Extended Edition only)
|-
|[[Ian McKellen]]||[[Gandalf]]
|-
|[[Christopher Lee]]||[[Saruman]]
|-
|[[Lawrence Makoare]]||[[Lurtz]]
|-
|[[Brent McIntyre]]||[[Witch-king]]
|-
|[[Peter McKenzie]]||[[Elendil]]
|-
|[[Sarah McLeod]]||[[Rose Cotton|Rosie Cotton]]
|-
|[[Dominic Monaghan]]||[[Meriadoc Brandybuck|Merry]]
|-
|[[Elizabeth Moody]]||[[Lobelia Sackville-Baggins|Lobelia]] (Extended Edition only)
|-
|[[Viggo Mortensen]]||[[Aragorn]]
|-
|[[Ian Mune]]||[[Bounders|Bounder]]
|-
|[[Craig Parker]]||[[Haldir]]
|-
|[[Cameron Rhodes]]||[[Farmer Maggot]]
|-
|[[John Rhys-Davies]]||[[Gimli]]
|-
|[[Martyn Sanderson]]||[[Harry Goatleaf|Gate Keeper]]
|-
|[[Brian Sergent]]||[[Ted Sandyman]] (Extended Edition only)
|-
|[[Andy Serkis]]||[[Gollum]] (voice)
|-
|[[Harry Sinclair]]||[[Isildur]]
|-
|[[Liv Tyler]]||[[Arwen]]
|-
|[[David Weatherley]]||[[Barliman Butterbur]]
|-
|[[Hugo Weaving]]||[[Elrond]]<br>[[Isildur]] (voice)
|-
|[[Elijah Wood]]||[[Frodo Baggins|Frodo]]
|-
|[[Victoria Beynon-Cole]], Lee Hartley, Sam La Hood, Chris Streeter, Philip Grieve, Jonathan Jordan, Semi Kuresa, Clinton Ulyatt, Paul Bryson, Lance Fabian Kemp, Jono Manks, Ben Price, Kate O'Rourke (Extended Edition), Thomas McGinty (Extended Edition)||[[Orcs|Hero Orcs]], [[Orcs|Goblins]], [[Uruk-hai|Uruks]], [[Nazgûl|Ringwraiths]]
|-
|Billy Jackson, [[Katie Jackson]]||[[Hobbits|Cute Hobbit Children]]
|}

===Uncredited===
{| class="wikitable mw-collapsible"
|- style="background: var(--tg-color-surface-2);" 
!Actor!!Role
|-
|[[Gino Acevedo]], Xander Forterie, Rich Mayberry||[[Seven Rings|Ring]] [[Dwarves|Dwarf-lords]]
|-
|Betty Adams, Timothy Bartlett, Darcy Beehre, Bob Blackwell, Dave Houma, Timothy Patrick, Jo Surgison, Kate Surgison, John Turner, Josh Widdicombe, Geoffrey Hughes, Bernie Lord||[[Hobbits]]
|-
|Frazier Anderson, Daniel Andrews, Rodney Bane, Mana Hira Davis, Branko Dordevich, Siaosi Fonua, Winham "Mu" Hammond, Ralph Johnson, Timothy Patrick, Nooroa Poa, Chris Reid, Samuel E. Shore, John Turner, James Waterhouse-Brown, Saeed Zamiri||[[Orcs]]
|-
|Sala Baker, Rachel Clentworth, Mana Hira Davis, Ben Fransham, Winham "Mu" Hammond, Lani Jackson, Sharen Maxwell, David J. Muzzerall, Steve Reinsfield, John Turner, James Waterhouse-Brown, Robert Young||[[Orcs|Goblins]]
|-
|Daniel Andrews, Sala Baker, Sean Button, Ryan Carey, Tack Daniel, Peter Daube, Mana Hira Davis, Shane Dawson, Branko Dordevich, Siaosi Fonua, Ben Fransham, Matthew Gibbons, Winham "Mu" Hammond, [[Greg Lane]], Tim McLachlan, Nathan Meister, Dean Morganty, Greg "Danger" Morrison, Andrew Munro, Grant Roa, Vincent Roxburgh, Mike Stearne, Andrew Stehlin, Ken Stratton, Tim Wong||[[Uruk-hai]]
|-
|Matt Appleton, Jonathan Harding, Sam Kelly, Blair Morton||[[Council of Elrond|Council]] [[Elves]]
|-
|Jarl Benzon, Ben Britton, Kester Fordham, Sam Kelly, Jason Secto||[[Last Alliance of Elves and Men|Last Alliance]] [[Elves]]
|-
|[[Jørn Benzon]], Ben Fransham, Jonathan Harding, Ax McClennan, Jason Secto||[[Lothlórien]] [[Elves]]
|-
|Lynden Berryman||[[Uruk-hai|Uruk at Amen Hen]]
|-
|Ben Britton, Sabine Crossen, Kester Fordham, Andy Gunn, Gareth Jensen||[[Rivendell]] [[Elves]]
|-
|[[Jed Brophy]], Tim McLachlan||[[Nazgûl|Ringwraiths]]
|-
|Riley Brophy, Phoebe Gittins, Taea Hartwell||[[Hobbits|Cute Hobbit Children]]
|-
|Justin B. Carter, James Morcan, Ken Reinsfield, Vincent Roxburgh, Billy "Roy" Taylor, Marcus Thorne, Brendan Young||[[Gondorians|Gondorian Soldiers]]
|-
|Norman Cates, Jeff Kingsford-Brown, Jill Jackson||[[Hobbits|Party Hobbits]]
|-
|Randell William Cook||[[Cave-trolls|Cave Troll]]
|-
|Matthew Gibbons||[[Uruk-hai|Birthing Uruk]]
|-
|[[Michael Elsworth]]||[[Círdan|Círdan the Shipwright]]
|-
|Warren Green, Stu Johnson, Peter Lyon||[[Isengarders|Isengard Orc Blacksmiths]]
|-
|Zo Hartley||[[Hobbits|Kissing Hobbit]] (Extended Edition)
|-
|Ray Henwood, Ralph Johnson||[[Council of Elrond|Council]] [[Men]]
|-
|[[John Howe]], [[Alan Lee]], Larry Rew||[[Nine Rings|Ring]] [[Nazgûl|Kings of Men]]
|-
|[[Peter Jackson]]||[[Albert Dreary]]
|-
|Tim Kano||[[Gondorians|Gondorian Citizen]]
|-
|Sacha Lee||[[Gollum|Arms of Gollum]]
|-
|Marta Martí||[[Hobbiton|Village]] [[Hobbits|Female Hobbit]]
|-
|[[Bret McKenzie]]||[[Figwit]]
|-
|Nathan Meister||[[Gondorians|Gondorian Guard]]
|-
|Liz Merton||[[Hobbits|Hobbit Band Member]]
|-
|Arnold Montey, Paul Shapcott||[[Nazgûl|Burning Ringwraiths]]
|-
|Greg "Danger" Morrison, Robert Young||[[Orcs|Orc Archers]]
|-
|Christy Qullium||[[Elves|Galadriel's Elf]]
|-
|[[Shane Rangi]]||[[Witch-king]]
|-
|[[Thomas Robins]]||[[Gollum|Hand of Gollum]]
|-
|Chris Ryan, Bruce Sinclair, Rebecca Fitzgerald||[[Bree-landers|Breelanders]]
|-
|Samuel E. Shore||[[Men|Refugee]]
|-
|Ken Stratton||[[Isengard]] [[Isengarders|Orc]]
|-
|Ken Stratton, Andy Gunn||[[Last Alliance of Elves and Men|Last Alliance]] [[Men|Soldier]]
|-
|Ken Stratton||[[Minas Morgul|Morgul]] [[Mordor-orcs|Orc]]
|-
|John Turner||[[Men|Wildman]]
|-
|Nathan Clark||[[Galdor (elf of the Havens)|Galdor]]
|-
|Nikki Webster||[[Elves|Elf]]
|-
|[[Andy Serkis]]||[[Nazgûl|Black Rider]], [[Witch-king]] (voices)
|-
|[[Fran Walsh]]||[[Nazgûl|Screaming Ringwraith]] (voice)
|-
|Mike Hopkins||[[Farmer Maggot]] (voice)
|-
|Augie Davis, Ross Duncan, Jason Fitch, Micha Kemp, Sandro Kopp, Andrea Russell, Pete Smith, Piripi Waretini, Tim Wong, Andrew Van Klei||Extras
|}

==Special effects==
''The Fellowship of the Ring'' makes extensive use of digital, practical and makeup special effects throughout. One noticeable effect that appears in almost every scene involves setting a proper scale so that the characters are all the proper height.  Elijah Wood, who plays Frodo, is 5&nbsp;ft 6 in (1.68 m) tall in real life; but the character of Frodo Baggins is barely four feet tall.  Many different tricks were used to cast the hobbits (and Gimli the Dwarf) as diminutive.  Large and small stunt doubles were used in certain scenes, while entire duplicates of certain sets (especially Bag End in Hobbiton) were built at two different scales, so that the characters would appear to be the appropriate size. At one point in the film Frodo runs along a corridor in Bag End, followed by Gandalf. Elijah Wood and Ian McKellen were filmed in separate versions of the same corridor, built at two different scales, and a fast camera pan conceals the edit between the two. Forced perspective was also employed, making it look as though the short hobbits were interacting with taller Men and Elves. Surprising the makers of the film, kneeling was used to great effect.

For the battle between the Last Alliance and the forces of Sauron that begins the film, an elaborate CGI animation system, called Massive, was developed to allow thousands of individual animated "characters" in the program to act differently.  This helped give the illusion of realism to the battle sequences.

==Filming locations==
A list of filming locations, sorted by appearance order in the movie:
{| class="wikitable"
|- bgcolor="#CCCCCC"
!Fictional<br>Location
!Specific Location<br>in New Zealand
!General Area<br>in New Zealand
|-
|[[Hobbiton]]||Matamata||Waikato
|-
|Gardens of [[Isengard]]||Harcourt Park||Upper Hutt
|-
|[[The Shire]] woods||Otaki Gorge Road||&nbsp;
|-
|[[Bucklebury Ferry]]||Keeling Farm||Manukau
|-
|Forest near [[Bree]]||Takaka Hill||Nelson
|-
|[[Trollshaws]]||Waitarere Forest||&nbsp;
|-
|Ford of [[Bruinen]]||Arrowtown Recreational Reserve||Queenstown
|-
|[[Rivendell]]||Kaitoke Regional Park||Upper Hutt
|-
|[[Eregion]]||Mount Olympus||Nelson
|-
|[[Dimrill Dale]]||Lake Alta||The Remarkables
|-
|[[Dimrill Dale]]||Mount Owen||Nelson
|-
|[[Lothlórien]]||Lake Wakatipu||Queenstown
|-
|River [[Anduin]]||Rangitikei River||&nbsp;
|-
|River [[Anduin]]||Poet's Corner||Upper Hutt
|-
|[[Parth Galen]]||Paradise||Glenorchy
|-
|[[Amon Hen]]||Mavora Lakes||Milford Sound
|}

==Deviations from the source material==
===Narrative differences===
Jackson, Walsh and Boyens made numerous changes to the story. Jackson said his main desire was to make a film focused primarily on Frodo and the Ring, the "backbone" of the story.  The prologue condenses Tolkien's backstory, in which The Last Alliance's seven-year siege of the [[Barad-dûr]] is a single battle, where [[Sauron]] is shown to explode, though Tolkien only said his spirit flees.

Events at the beginning of the film are condensed or omitted altogether. In the book the time between Gandalf leaving the Ring to Frodo and returning to reveal its inscription, which is 17 years, is compressed for timing reasons. Because of this, Frodo is around the same age as Sam, Merry, and Pippin in the films. Frodo also spends a few months preparing to move to Buckland, on the eastern border of the shire. This move is omitted and combined with him setting out for Bree. Also compressed is the time between Frodo and Sam leaving Bag End and their meeting Merry and Pippin. Characters such as [[Tom Bombadil]] are left out to simplify the plot. Such sequences are left out to make time to introduce Saruman, who doesn't appear in the book until Gandalf's account at the Council of Elrond. Saruman's role is enhanced: he is to blame for the blizzard on Caradhras, a role taken from Sauron and/or Caradhras itself in the book. Gandalf's capture by Saruman has an added fight sequence.

[[Barliman Butterbur]]'s role at [[the Prancing Pony]] is largely removed for time, although the character does appear briefly.

The events at [[Weathertop]] were also altered. The fight against the Ringwraiths occurs at the ruins on top of the hill rather than a campsite at its base. When Frodo was stabbed in the book, the party spent two weeks travelling to Rivendell, but in the film it takes less than a week, with Frodo's condition worsening at a commensurately greater rate. [[Arwen]]'s role is greater in the film, accompanying Frodo all the way to [[Rivendell]], while in the book Frodo faces the Ringwraiths alone at the [[Ford of Bruinen]]. The character of [[Glorfindel]] was omitted entirely and his scenes were also given to Arwen. She was tacitly credited with the river rising against the Ringwraiths, which was the work of her father [[Elrond]] with aid from [[Gandalf]] in the book.

A notable addition is [[Aragorn]]'s self-doubt, which causes him to hesitate to claim the kingship of Gondor. This element is not present in the book, where Aragorn intends to claim the throne at an appropriate time. In the book Narsil is reforged immediately when he joins the Fellowship, but this event is instead moved to ''[[The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King|The Return of the King]]'' to symbolically coincide with his coronation. These elements were added because Peter Jackson believed that each character should be forced to grow or change over the course of the story.

Elrond's character gained an adversarial edge; he expresses doubts in the strength of Men to resist Sauron's evil after Isildur's failure to destroy the ring as depicted in the prologue. Jackson shortened the Council of Elrond by spreading its exposition into earlier parts of the film. Elrond's counsellor, [[Erestor]] — who suggested the Ring be given to Tom Bombadil — was completely absent from this scene. Gimli's father, [[Glóin]], was present but had no speaking lines.

The tone of the Moria sequence was altered. Although in the book the Fellowship only realises the Dwarves are all dead once they reach [[Balin]]'s tomb, the filmmakers instead used foreshadowing devices. Gandalf says to Gimli he would prefer not to enter Moria, and Saruman is shown to be aware of Gandalf's reticence, and also reveals an illustration of the Balrog in one of his books. The corpses of the dwarves are instantly shown as the Fellowship enter Moria.

In terms of narrative structure, the book simply ends; there is no climax, because Tolkien wrote the book as a single story published in three volumes. Jackson's version incorporates the first chapter of ''[[The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers|The Two Towers]]'' and makes its events, told in real time instead of flashback, simultaneous with the Breaking of the Fellowship. This finale is played as a climactic battle, where he first introduces the Uruk-hai referred to as Lurtz in the script. In the book, Boromir is unable to tell Aragorn which hobbits were kidnapped by the orcs before he dies. From there, Aragorn deduces Frodo's intentions when he notices a boat and Sam's pack missing. In the film, Aragorn and Frodo have a scene together where Frodo's intentions are explicitly stated.

===Linguistic elements===
Some fans also felt that movie producers missed the linguistic basis of the work (as Tolkien invented the world to bring his languages to life and not the other way around): 

Particularly, ''[[Namárië]],'' Galadriel's lament in [[Lothlórien]] that begins "Ai! laurië lantar lassi súrinen", did not appear in the film, although Tolkien considered it one of the highest points of ''The Fellowship of the Ring''. A few lines of the poem do, however, appear in the soundtrack on the track "Lothórien". Other samples of Elvish language from the books are treated similarly. However, Elvish (most often [[Sindarin]]) ''is'' spoken extensively in the film, with and without subtitles. The Elvish lines were, for the most part, devised specifically for the film version, sometimes based on English text written by Tolkien.

The movie features numerous books and artifacts with [[Tengwar]] inscriptions. Even though they were researched for accuracy, there are still a couple of peculiarities and inconsistencies not found in Tolkien's own Tengwar samples.

Another idiosyncrasy of the films is that [[Hobbits|Hobbit]] writing is shown in the Latin alphabet, while the books state that the Hobbits used the Tengwar. However, the Latin calligraphy was designed to resemble Tengwar, including ''tehtar'' above their corresponding vowels. This refers visually to the Tengwar while allowing viewers to immediately recognise the text.

==Score==
*[[The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring - Original Motion Picture Soundtrack]]
*[[The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring - The Complete Recordings]]

==Awards==
In 2002 the movie won four Academy Awards out of thirteen nominations. The four awards were won for Best Cinematography, Best Effects, Visual Effects, Best Makeup and Best Music, Original Score.  The nominations were Best Actor in a Supporting Role (Ian McKellen), Best Art Direction-Set Decoration, Best Costume Design, Best Director, Best Editing, Best Music, Song ([[Enya]], [[Nicky Ryan]] and [[Roma Ryan]] for "May It Be"), Best Picture, Best Sound and Best Writing, Screenplay Based on Material Previously Produced or Published.

After its theatre run, it ranked in the top ten highest grossing movies worldwide, with takings of $860,700,000 USA dollars from world-wide box office sales.  
(Source: [https://us.imdb.com/Charts/worldtopmovies IMDB Top Movies Chart]).

The movie has also been released on videotape and DVD, with some editions having additional footage and commentary not included in the theatrical release edition. Notable among the restored scenes is additional footage of a smiling Galadriel bestowing [[Gifts of Galadriel|gifts]] on the members of the fellowship. In the theatrical version, she appeared dark and brooding. On Tuesday, November 12, 2002, Special Extended DVD Edition of ''The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring'' was released, containing 208 minutes (3 hours, 28 minutes) of footage.

The extended editions of ''The Fellowship of the Ring'' and the second movie, ''[[The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers|The Two Towers]]'' had limited theatrical runs in selected cities worldwide in late 2003, during the run-up to the release of the final film, ''[[The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King|The Return of the King]]''.

==Reviews==
*[http://www.combustiblecelluloid.com/digitalwatch/lotrfellow.shtml Combustible Celluloid] - 3 out of 4 stars. (DVD)
*[http://www.eye.net/eye/issue/issue_12.13.01/film/lotr1.html Eye Weekly]
*[http://msnbc.msn.com/id/3540688/ MSNBC (Newsweek)] - A 'Ring' to Rule the Screen
*[http://rossanthony.com/L/ltrfellowship.shtml Ross Anthony] 2 out of 4 stars
*[http://seattlepi.nwsource.com/movies/51108_ring19q.shtml Seattle Post-Intelligencer One 'Ring' to bring them all ... into the theater]
*[http://www.paloaltoonline.com/movies/cgi/moviescreener_long.cgi?id=993 Palo Alto Online]
*[http://www.geocities.com/moviola3/peliculas/senor_anillos/senor_anillos.html Peliculas (Geocities) (Spanish)]
*[http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/movies/l/lotr1.html ReelViews]
*[http://splicedwire.com/01reviews/lordrings1.html SPLICEDWire]
*[http://www.filmstew.com/Content/Article.asp?ContentID=2251 Film Stew]
*[http://www.rottentomatoes.com/click/movie-1108476/reviews.php?critic=1&sortby=default&page=4&rid=275580 Shane Burridge]

===See also===
*[[The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring (DVD)]]
*[[The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring (extended edition)|''The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring'' (extended edition)]]

{{Screen}}
{{lordoftheringsfilms}}
{{title|italics}}

[[Category:The Lord of the Rings (film series)]]

[[de:Der Herr der Ringe: Die Gefährten (Film)]]
[[fi:The Fellowship of the Ring (2001)]]