{{album
| image = Rings of Power Season 2 Soundtrack.jpg
| title=The Lord of the Rings: The Rings of Power<br>(Season Two: Amazon Original Series Soundtrack)
| type=Soundtrack
| artist=[[Bear McCreary]]
| released=[[23 August]], [[2024]]
| genre=
| length=
| language=
| label=
}}
'''''The Lord of the Rings: The Rings of Power (Season Two: Amazon Original Series Soundtrack)''''' is an album composed by [[Bear McCreary]] for the second season of ''[[The Lord of the Rings: The Rings of Power]]'' television series. It was released online on [[23 August]], [[2024]] by Amazon Music. 

==Contents==
# [[Old Tom Bombadil]] (feat. [[Rufus Wainwright]])
# [[Rhûn (soundtrack)|Rhûn]] (feat. [[The Mystery of the Bulgarian Voices]])
# [[Life in the Canyon]]
# [[Golden Leaves]] (feat. [[Benjamin Walker]])
# [[Círdan's Perfection]]
# [[Stone Singers]] (feat. [[Sophia Nomvete]])
# [[Sandstorm at the Well]]
# [[Eregion (soundtrack)|Eregion]]
# [[Emissary at the Forge]]
# [[Shelob (soundtrack)|Shelob]]
# [[The Pyre]] (feat. [[Raya Yarbrough]])
# [[Estrid (soundtrack)|Estrid]]
# [[The Great Eagle]]
# [[The River-daughter]] (feat. Raya Yarbrough)
# [[Barrow-wights (soundtrack)|Barrow-wights]]
# [[Forgiveness Takes an Age]]
# [[Candles on the Tide]] (feat. [[Clydene Jackson]])
# [[Army of Orcs]]
# [[The Last Ballad of Damrod]] (feat. [[Jens Kidman]])
# [[Battle for Eregion]]
# [[Durin's Bane (soundtrack)|Durin's Bane]]
# [[Last Temptation]]
# [[The Staff]]
# [[Old Tom Bombadil|Old Tom Bombadil Reprise]] (feat. Rory Kinnear and Daniel Weyman)
# [[The Sun Yet Shines]]

==See also==
* [[Index:Soundtracks by year|Soundtracks by year]]

==External links==
* [https://press.amazonmgmstudios.com/us/en/press-release/ithe-lord-of-the-rings-the-rings-of-poweri-season--1 The Lord of the Rings: The Rings of Power (Season Two: Amazon Original Series Soundtrack) To Be Released Worldwide August 23, 2024]

{{title|italics}}
[[Category:The Lord of the Rings: The Rings of Power (Season Two: Amazon Original Series Soundtrack)| ]]