{{disambig-more|Two Towers|[[Two Towers (disambiguation)]]}}
{{video game infobox
| image = The Two Towers-(1994 MUD)-1.png
| name=The Two Towers MUD
| developer=
| publisher=
| platform=Online
| releasedate=September [[1994]]<ref name="Official">[http://t2tmud.org/ Official Site] (retrieved 20 March 2011)</ref>
| genre=[[wikipedia:LPMud|LP MUD]],<ref name="Tolkien Games">[http://www.lysator.liu.se/tolkien-games/entry/t2t.html The Two Towers] at Tolkien Games (retrieved 20 March 2011)</ref> [[wikipedia:Role-playing game#Electronic media|RPG]]
| modes=
| rating=PG-13
| distribution=
}}

'''''The Two Towers''''', or '''''T2T''''', is an [[Multi-User games|LPMud]] set in [[J.R.R. Tolkien]]'s universe of [[Middle-earth]] at the time of events in the third volume of ''[[The Lord of the Rings]]''.<ref name="Official"/> The players can choose to play as good or evil; the objective is to help the Free destroy the Evil and to help the Evil conquer the Free. 

==Description==
The world depicted in ''The Two Towers'' holds, in total, nearly a hundred thousand rooms and hundreds of quests. The regions represented in the game include [[Eriador]], [[Rhovanion]], [[Gondor]], [[Umbar]], [[Harondor]], [[Harad]], and [[Mordor]]. The scope ranges from cities such as [[Bree]] and [[Minas Tirith]] to small homes and farmlands, as well as huge dungeon complexes such as the [[Moria|Mines of Moria]].

''The Two Towers'' also includes representations of most of the members of the [[Fellowship of the Ring]] who were living during its setting.

''The Two Towers'' depicts the date of March 15, 3019, [[Third Age]] when Minas Tirith was under siege. The mud plays host to a battle between good and evil, with the free races ([[Hobbit]], [[Sindar]], [[Silvan Elves|Silvan]], [[Dwarf]], [[Edain]], [[Dunlendings|Dunlending]], [[Dúnedain]], and [[Rohirrim|Eorling]]) generally contesting against the minions of [[Sauron]] ([[Uruk-hai]], [[Easterlings|Easterling]], [[Númenórean]], [[Haradrim]], and [[Variag]]), although members of the free races may choose to betray their heritage.

==History==
''The Two Towers'' began in 1994 as a project between a few students and has from the start been free of charge. It is run with help from player donations and the administrators' private funds.
Under constant development from the very beginning, the game is now a complete virtual world almost completely identical to the geographical properties of Middle-earth, with game areas including West and East [[Arda]], Harondor, Harad, Umbar, and Mordor. The ability to play as a minion of Sauron was removed in 2001, then reintroduced in 2005 after a major overhaul.

In 1997, ''The Two Towers''<nowiki>'</nowiki>s web site was used as a visual example of an "interesting entertainment site" &mdash; "a site for sore eyes" &mdash; in ''Creating Web Pages for Dummies'', and the game was used as the [[Multi-User games|MUD]] of reference in an academic paper.<ref>http://zencadet.info/net.speak/</ref>

=== New Features ===
On [[24 October|October 24]], [[2010]], a string of new features were announced, including:

*Allowing players to opt-in or opt-out of player vs. player combat
*A fully featured [http://t2tmud.org/client Flash client] to log on directly through our website
*A fully featured Facebook application
*A fully featured MySpace application 
*Extended races and classes to choose from (multi-classing allowed)
*MXP/MCCP support
*Clans and guilds
*RP events and rewards available
*100s of quests available to solve
== External links ==
* '''[http://t2tmud.org/ Official Site]'''
** [http://t2tmud.org/client/simple/simple.php?port=8080 Play the game]
** [http://t2tmud.org/forum/ Official forum]
* [http://angband.com/wiki/index.php/Main_Page Community wiki]
* [http://www.mudconnect.com/mud-bin/mud_search.cgi?Mode=MUD&mud=The+Two+Towers The Two Towers] at mudconnect.com

** [http://apps.facebook.com/thetwotowers/ Play the game on Facebook]
** [http://www.myspace.com/games/play/197576 Play the game on Myspace]
{{References}}
{{title|italics}}
[[Category:Multi-User Dungeons]]
[[Category:Role-playing video games]]