{{expansion}}
{{episode infobox
| name=The Great Wave
| image = The Lord of the Rings The Rings of Power - The Great Wave.jpg
| caption=
| director=[[Wayne Che Yip]]
| writer=[[Stephany Folsom]]<br/>[[J.D. Payne]]<br/>[[Patrick McKay]]
| screenplay=
| basedon=
| producer=
| starring=
| narrator=
| cinematography=
| editing=
| music=[[Bear McCreary]]<br/>Main Title by [[Howard Shore]]
| animator=
| studio=[[Amazon Studios]]
| distributor=
| released=[[16 September]] [[2022]]
| runtime=71 minutes
| country=
| language=
| budget=
| gross=
| website=
| imdb_id=11609038
| gallery=The Rings of Power (TV series)
| previous=[[Adar (episode)|Adar]]
| next=[[Partings]]
}}

{{Quote|[[Tar-Míriel|Queen Regent Míriel's]] faith is tested; [[Isildur]] finds himself at a crossroads; [[Elrond]] uncovers a [[Mithril|secret]]; [[Arondir]] is given an ultimatum; [[Theo]] disobeys [[Bronwyn]].|Official Synopsis, [[Amazon Studios]]}}

'''The Great Wave''' is the fourth episode of [[Amazon Studios]]'s television series, ''[[The Lord of the Rings: The Rings of Power]]'', released on [[15 September]], [[2022]].

==Synopsis==
===Númenor===
[[Tar-Míriel|Queen Regent Míriel]] is conducting the ceremony of the [[Blessing of the Children]] when suddenly, the earth starts to shake. Míriel looks outside to see water rushing in, knocking over the city walls while a huge wave towers over the [[Armenelos]]. As water floods into the palace, Míriel suddenly wakes up from her [[Downfall of Númenor|dream]] and is greeted by [[Edda (The Rings of Power)|Edda]], who asks her what business she will attend to that day.

In a city square, [[Tamar (The Rings of Power)|Tamar]] addresses a group of people about Míriel's dealings with [[Galadriel]], spreading misinformation that the Elves will take over all of the guilds of Númenor. [[Ar-Pharazôn|Pharazôn]], upon being made aware by his son, [[Kemen]], goes to address the crowd himself. He tells the [[Men]] that being afraid of an Elf is unworthy of Númenor, assuring them that he will keep Númenor a kingdom of men. In the aftermath of the speech, Kemen introduces himself to [[Eärien]], later inviting her to dinner.

[[Galadriel]] tries to convince a skeptical Míriel that [[Halbrand]] is the exiled king of the Southlands and that Númenor should help him defeat [[Sauron]] in [[Middle-earth]]. When Míriel rebuffs her, Galadriel aggressively demands an audience with Míriel's father, [[Tar-Palantir]], whereupon she is put in jail in a cell alongside Halbrand. Meanwhile, while undergoing the sea trial, [[Isildur]] is distracted by a vision of the [[Andustar|West]], causing himself, [[Valandil (The Rings of Power)|Valandil]], and [[Ontamo]] to fail the trial and be expelled from the [[Guild of Venturers|Sea Guard]].

Talking to Halbrand, Galadriel realizes that she provoked Míriel's anger and fear by demanding to speak with the king. Pharazôn arrives with a guard to escort her to a ship back to Middle-earth, but she overpowers the soldiers and escapes to the [[King's house|King's Tower]], where she confronts Míriel near Tar-Palantir's bed. In response to Galadriel's questions, Míriel informs her that a rebellion took place when Tar-Palantir announced plans to renew relations with the Elves, and she was chosen to rule in his stead. She then shows Galadriel a ''[[Palantíri|palantír]]'' in which can be seen the vision of Númenor overwhelmed by a great wave. Míriel says she is afraid that following Galadriel's advice will provoke the wrath of the [[Valar]] and lead to Númenor's destruction.

The next morning, the Númenoreans watch Galadriel step onto a boat in the harbor rowing out to a ship. Walking back to the palace, Míriel sees the petals of the [[Nimloth (tree)|White Tree]] falling, indicating a sign from the Valar. Míriel then announces that she plans to go to Middle-earth with Galadriel to aid the people of the Southlands against Sauron. [[Elendil]] asks for volunteers for the expeditionary force and receives an enthusiastic response, beginning with Isildur, Valandil, and Ontamo.

===The Southlands===
[[Arondir]] is brought before the mysterious [[Adar]], who proves to be an elf tortured and mutilated and now leader of the orcs. Adar says that Arondir believes many lies, some run so deep that even rocks and roots believe them and undoing them would require a new world. He sends Arondir to the men hiding in the watch tower with a message.

Meanwhile humans set up camp in the old elven watch tower. Theo and Rowan attempt to raid Waldreg's root cellar and the tavern but are attacked by orcs. Rowan abandons Theo, who hides in the well. At night he attempts to escape while the orcs hunt for him and Arondir rescues him. 

Back at the tower, Waldreg tells Theo that the hilt is a power that will bring back Sauron and that the starfall was the sign that Sauron's return is near.

===Eregion and Khazad-dûm===
In Eregion, Celebrimbor and Elrond dance around issues. Elrond returns to Khazad-dûm where Disa tries to put him off, but Elrond overhears her talk with Durin about where he will be and descends to the old mine. There he discovers the thin vein of mithril in the stone, but Durin confronts him. Durin demands an oath of secrecy. Upon receiving it, he displays this new ore to Elrond and gifts a tiny shard to him. Suddenly the lower mine collapses with four dwarves inside.
Disa sings in a way that reverberates through the rocks and allows them to free the trapped dwarves but the king has shut down the mining completely, resulting in a complete falling-out between father and son. Elrond's story of his own father convinces them to reconcile and Durin travels to Lindon with Elrond, admitting he believes there's more going on than has been said.

==Cast==
:''In order of appearance'' (in episode credits)
{| class="wikitable"
|- bgcolor="#CCCCCC"
!Actor!!Role
|-
|[[Cynthia Addai-Robinson]]||[[Tar-Míriel|Queen Regent Míriel]]
|-
|[[Ema Horvath]]||[[Eärien]]
|-
|[[Leon Wadham]]||[[Kemen (The Rings of Power)|Kemen]]
|-
|[[Trystan Gravelle]]||[[Pharazôn]]
|-
|[[Morfydd Clark]]||[[Galadriel]]
|-
|[[Lloyd Owen]]||[[Elendil|Captain Elendil]]
|-
|[[Charlie Vickers]]||[[Halbrand]]
|-
|[[Maxim Baldry]]||[[Isildur]]
|-
|[[Anthony Crum]]||[[Ontamo]]
|-
|[[Alex Tarrant]]||[[Valandil (The Rings of Power)|Valandil]]
|-
|[[Ismael Cruz Córdova]]||[[Arondir]]
|-
|[[Joseph Mawle]]||[[Adar (The Rings of Power)|Adar]]
|-
|[[Nazanin Boniadi]]||[[Bronwyn]]
|-
|[[Peter Tait]]||[[Tredwill]]
|-
|[[Geoff Morrell]]||[[Waldreg]]
|-
|[[Tyroe Muhafidin]]||[[Theo]]
|-
|[[Ian Blackburn]]||[[Rowan (The Rings of Power)|Rowan]]
|-
|[[Robert Aramayo]]||[[Elrond]]
|-
|[[Charles Edwards]]||[[Celebrimbor|Lord Celebrimbor]]
|-
|[[Sophia Nomvete]]||[[Disa|Princess Disa]]
|-
|[[Owain Arthur]]||[[Durin IV|Prince Durin IV]]
|-
|[[Ken Blackburn]]||[[Tar-Palantir]]
|-
|[[Peter Mullan]]||[[Durin III|King Durin III]]
|-
|[[Laura Medes]]||[[Númenóreans|Young Mother]]
|-
|[[Carmel McGlone]]||[[Edda (The Rings of Power)|Edda]]
|-
|[[Jason Hood]]||[[Tamar (The Rings of Power)|Tamar]]
|-
|[[Adam Faiz]]||[[Guild of Weaponsmiths|Guild Merchant]]
|-
|[[Antonio Te Maioha]]||[[Sail Master]]
|-
|[[Phil Grieve]]||[[Bazur]]
|-
|[[Luke Hawker]]||[[Magrot]]
|-
|[[Jed Brophy]]||[[Vrath]]
|-
|[[Edward Clendon]]||[[Grugzûk]]
|-
|[[Robert Strange]]||[[Orcs|Warrior Orc]]
|-
|[[Dave Chapman]]||[[Dwarves|Masked Dwarf Guard]]
|-
|[[Preston O'Brien]]||[[Númenóreans|Guardsman Two]]
|-
|[[Rachel Payne]]||[[Dwarves|Dwarf Singer]]
|}

===Uncredited===
{| class="wikitable"
|- bgcolor="#CCCCCC"
!Actor!!Role
|-
|Unknown actor||[[Alinel]]
|-
|Unknown actor||[[Gamli]]
|-
|Unknown actor||[[Gerda]]
|-
|[[Edward Clendon]]||[[Lurka]]
|}

==Trivia==
Below is a list of trivia from Amazon's "X-Ray" feature that accompanied the episode.
*Scene 2 - "Most of the details and elaborations told herein are derived from '[[The Lord of the Rings]]', its prologue entitled '[[Concerning Hobbits]]', and its [[Appendices]], [[Appendix A|A]] through [[Appendix F|F]], where the intrepid traveler may journey to discover even farther horizons."
*Scene 5 - "The White Tree of [[Númenor]], [[Nimloth]], is a descendant of one of the [[Two Trees]] of [[Valinor]] — it is a seedling of the tree [[Galathilion]], itself borne of the fruit of [[Telperion]] that once lit the [[Aman|Undying Lands]]. (Book VI, Chapter 5)"
*Scene 11 - "The [[Meneltarma]] is the tall mountain that rises in the center of the isle of [[Númenor]]. ([[Appendix A]])"
*Scene 17 - "The [[Andustar|Western Shores]] of [[Númenor]] face the [[Aman|Undying Lands]] and are the absolute westernmost point of all mortal lands. Before they were expelled, [[elves]] from [[Tol Eressëa|Eressëa]] would come to those shores with gifts and knowledge. ([[Appendix A]])"
*Scene 20 - "[[Beleriand]] was the country that expanded west of today's [[Middle-earth]] before bring destroyed in the [[First Age]]. [[Lindon]] is all that remains of what it used to be. ([[Appendix A]])"
*Scene 22 - "[[Orcs]] eat and drink like other [[Races|species]] - they may be wicked and cruel, but if they are to live at all they must live like other creatures. They will foul waters and meats when in need, but they are not so [[:Category:Evil|evil]] or different that they can get by on poison. (Book VI, Chapter 1)"
*Scene 24 - "[[Elrond|Elrond's]] father was [[Eärendil|Eärendil the Mariner]], who crossed the [[Belegaer|Sea]] to obtain the help of the [[Valar]]. He was given a fate apart, sailing his ship through the sky as a sign of hope to those oppressed by evil forces. ([[Appendix A]])"
*Scene 26 - "[[Dwarves]] have a special reverence for the [[Mirrormere]], the lake just outside the eastern entrance to [[Khazad-dûm]] - they say that in the reflection of its dark waters, the first [[Durin I|Durin]] beheld a crown of stars above his head. (Book II, Chapter 4)"
*Scene 28 - "To mine in [[Khazad-dûm]] is less a blunt-force affair, and more an act of revered sculpting - slowly and methodically tending to the stone to uncover the secrets held within. (Book III, Chapter 8)."
*Scene 32 - "The badges on [[Ar-Pharazôn|Pharazôn's]] tunic are symbolic of the many Guilds of [[Númenor]] - each Guild has a crest to represent it, and each specializes in a [[Guild of Venturers|specific craft]] or [[Guild of Weaponsmiths|civic responsibility]]."
*Scene 36 - "The [[Palantíri]] were made by the [[Noldor]] in [[Valinor]], perhaps even by [[Fëanor]] himself. Objects of incredible power, the full extent of what one can see within them is mere speculation, but they could undoubtedly see across seas of both water and time to perceive things far off and days remote. (Book III, Chapter 11)."
*Scene 38 - "The language the [[Orcs]] use is the [[Black Speech]], a tongue used without a love of its words, filled with curses and abuse. It was devised for the use of the servants of evil. ([[Appendix F]])"
*Scene 41 - "[[Dwarf-women]] seldom walk abroad from their own realms, giving rise to foolish beliefs about them amongst outsiders. ([[Appendix A]])"
*Scene 42 - "[[Durin]] was the name of the eldest of the [[Fathers of the Dwarves|Seven Fathers]] of the [[Dwarves]], and the ancestors of all the kings of the [[Longbeards]]. [[Durin I]] was known as Durin the Deathless, for he lived for such a long time, a much greater span than is normal for [[dwarves]]. ([[Appendix A]])"
*Scene 44 - "[[Men]] have always ranked among the servants of the Dark Powers. Through pride they prove easy to corrupt - or dominate. (Book II, Chapter 2)."
*Scene 47 - "The [[Tar-Palantir|King of Númenor]] is considered by many to be one of [[Faithful|The Faithful]], those who resist the dominant pull of the kingdom away from its roots and affiliation with the [[Eldar]] and the [[Valar]]. He tried to bring his kingdom back to the elven ways of its beginnings, but in so doing created strife and rebellion among the [[King's Men|people]] he ruled. ([[Appendix A]])"

==Production==

==Differences==

==Reception==

{{references}}
==External links==
* [https://rop.digitaltolkien.com/S1E4/ The Great Wave] at ROP Data
*[https://m.youtube.com/watch?v=5oMQrjSrXfU Episode analysis on Rings & Realms] (with [[Corey Olsen]])
*[https://bearmccreary.com/the-lord-of-the-rings-episode-104/ Scoring ''The Great Wave''] by [[Bear McCreary]]

{{title}}
{{rop-episodes}}
[[Category:The Rings of Power (TV series) episodes|04]]

[[fi:Suuri aalto (jakso)]]