{{scene
| name = The Account of Isildur
| film = [[The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring]]
| image = The Lord of the Rings - The Fellowship of the Ring - The Account of Isildur.jpg
| number = 7 (theatrical edition)<br />
           8 (extended edition)
| duration = 2:41
| event = [[Gandalf]] travels to [[Minas Tirith]] to research the [[One Ring]]; the [[Ringwraiths]] search for "Baggins".
| characters = [[Gandalf]], [[Isildur]] (in flashback), [[Ringwraiths]]
| previous = [[Keep It Secret, Keep It Safe (scene)|Keep It Secret, Keep It Safe]]
| next = [[At the Green Dragon]]
}}

'''The Account of Isildur''' is the seventh scene of ''[[The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring]]'' and the eighth scene of [[The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring (extended edition)|''The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring'' (extended edition)]].

==Synopsis==
In the land of [[Mordor]], [[Gollum]] is tortured into revealing the [[Shire]] and the bearer of the Ring. The [[Ringwraiths]] embark from [[Minas Morgul]] towards the Shire.

Gandalf leaves [[Frodo]] and the [[Shire]], crossing [[Middle-earth]] to the land of [[Gondor]], hoping to see the archives of [[Minas Tirith]]. Gandalf arrives and begins looking at the various scrolls in the archives. It is not long before he finds one authored by [[Isildur]] himself, the last person to see the [[One Ring]] before it vanished. Isildur describes the Ring's appearance and how fiery letters appear when the Ring is heated. Gandalf realizes he must test Frodo's ring by using fire.

A Ringwraith is shown asking a [[Hobbit]] for "Baggins." The Hobbit nervously tells him that the Bagginses live up in [[Hobbiton]].

==Differences==
As a result of the time compression discussed earlier, Gandalf's search for information regarding the One Ring is drastically shortened from the time it takes in the books. [[Denethor]], who has a brief appearance when this scene is described at the [[Council of Elrond]], is omitted. The language on Isildur's scroll is slightly different than that of the book, but not substantially.

[[Category:The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring scenes|08]]