{{chapter
| image=Darrell Sweet - The Death of Thorin Oakenshield.jpg|left|thumb
| title=The Return Journey
| book=The Hobbit
| number=18
| location=[[Ravenhill]] and [[Dale]]
| previous=The Clouds Burst
| next=The Last Stage
}}
{{quote|If more of us valued food and cheer and song above hoarded gold, it would be a merrier world.|[[Thorin Oakenshield]]}}
'''The Return Journey''' is 18th and penultimate chapter of ''[[The Hobbit]]''.

==Synopsis==
When [[Bilbo Baggins|Bilbo]] awoke, he was still lying with a bad headache on the side of [[Ravenhill]], but he was otherwise unharmed. From the camps below, he saw that the [[Elves]], [[Men]], and [[Dwarves]] had won the battle against the [[Orcs|goblins]] and [[Wargs]]. A man came searching for Bilbo but could not find him until the [[Hobbits|hobbit]] remembered to take off his [[the One Ring|magic ring]]. Bilbo was carried back to the camp near [[Dale]] where [[Gandalf]] waited and was delighted to see the hobbit alive. However, there was sad business to attend to. Bilbo had to say farewell to [[Thorin|Thorin Oakenshield]] for the last time, because he was mortally wounded. Thorin asked Bilbo's forgiveness for the harsh words that had been spoken earlier, at the gates of [[Erebor]].

[[Fíli]] and [[Kíli]] had also been killed defending Thorin, but the rest of the [[Dwarves]] had survived. Gandalf described the end of the [[Battle of Five Armies|battle]] for Bilbo: the eagles, watching the movements of the goblins, had come just in time and turned the tide of battle. Yet things still might have gone badly were it not for the sudden appearance of [[Beorn]] in the shape of a bear, massive and enraged. This had sent the rest of the goblins scattering, and now they were all either dead or in hiding.

After a long while, Bilbo decided to return home, and he and Gandalf said goodbye to not only the surviving [[Thorin and Company|Company]], but the dwarves that had fallen as well. They shortly left, but would not enter [[Mirkwood]], and instead followed Beorn through the [[Grey Mountains]]. The even spent [[Yule]] in his [[Beorn's Hall|halls]]. They eventually parted with him as well, and crossed through the [[Misty Mountains]] into [[Rivendell]].

[[Category:The Hobbit chapters|Return Journey]]
[[fi:Paluumatka]]