{{disambig-more|The Fellowship of the Ring|[[The Fellowship of the Ring (disambiguation)]]}}
{{board game infobox
| image = The Fellowship of the Ring (board game).jpg
| name=The Fellowship of the Ring
| designer=Bruce Neidlinger, [[Coleman Charlton]]
| illustrator=Charles Peale, Gail McIntosh (cover), Leonard Cook, Rick Britton, [[Terry Kevin Amthor|Terry Amthor]]  
| publisher=[[Iron Crown Enterprises]]
| releasedate=[[1983]]
| players=2
| ages=12+
| ice=7100
| isbn=0425078116
| isbn2=978-0425078112
}}
'''''The Fellowship of the Ring''''' is a [[1983]] board game based on [[J.R.R. Tolkien]]'s ''[[The Lord of the Rings]]''.

== Front Cover Text ==

Based on the works of J.R.R. Tolkien

As Sauron you control the Forces of Darkness including Balrogs, Dragons, Nazgul, bands of orcs, and other evil servants. You must seek and destroy the naive dupes of the Valar in their attempt to keep THE RING from its rightful master. As the Fellowship player you must elude and misdirect the minions of Sauron as you bear the heavy burden of THE RING towards its destruction in the land of swelling darkness. Struggle for the control of the greatest focus of power in Middle-earth, THE ONE TRUE RING.

== Back Cover Text ==

*Suitable for ages 13 and up
*Complexity rating of 6 (with 10 being the most complex)
*Playing time 1 to 5 hours

As the Fellowship player maneuver Gandalf, Frodo, Aragorn and the rest of the Fellowship and their allies as they attempt to carry the Ring towards Mordor and its eventual destruction in the Cracks of Doom.

As the Enemy player hunt down and crush the pitiful forces of the Fellowship using your minions: Nazgul, Balrogs, Dragons, Giant Spiders, bands of Orcs and Trolls, assassins and other evil servants of Sauron. 

The Fellowship of the Ring is a two player game based upon J.R.R. Tolkien's three volume epic, The Lord of the Rings. Action focuses on the early periods as the Fellowship attempts to move the Ring from the Shire to the vicinity of Mordor. One player controls the forces of Sauron, the Dark Lord; while the other player controls the Fellowship characters and their allies. 

The game uses special cards and plastic markers to implement deployment and hidden movement. The cards and markers even allow certain combats to be resolved without revealing the identities of the combatants. The Fellowship player attempts to avoid, deceive, and misdirect the Enemy player while moving towards Mordor. The Enemy player attempts to force the Fellowship player into combat where the Ring can be retrieved for its rightful master, Sauron of Mordor. 

The rules are organized for a standard scenario and basic game; however optional rules are included for simpler and advanced games.

This game contains: 
*21"x26" full color mounted mapboard of Tolkien's Middle Earth 
*222 illustrated playing cards 
*65 plastic playing pieces 
*40 diecut counters 
*Rulesbook, card displays, charts and tables

==External links==
*[http://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/1187/the-fellowship-of-the-ring The Fellowship of the Ring] at [http://boardgamegeek.com/ BoardGameGeek]
{{DEFAULTSORT:Fellowship of the Ring (board game), The}}
{{title|italics}}
[[Category:Board games]]