{{scene
| name = The Council of Elrond
| film = [[The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring]]
| image = The Lord of the Rings - The Fellowship of the Ring - Council of Elrond2.jpg
| number = 27 (extended)<br>
           23 (theatrical)
| duration =
| event = The [[Council of Elrond]]<br/>Formation of the [[Fellowship of the Ring]]
| characters = [[Elrond]], [[Gandalf]], [[Frodo Baggins|Frodo]], [[Boromir]], [[Aragorn]], [[Legolas]], [[Gimli]], [[Samwise Gamgee|Sam]], [[Meriadoc Brandybuck|Merry]], [[Peregrin Took|Pippin]]
| previous = [[The Evenstar (The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring scene)|The Evenstar]]
| next = [[Gilraen's Memorial]]
}}
'''The Council of Elrond''' is the twenty-third scene of ''[[The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring]]'' and the twenty-seventh of [[The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring (extended edition)|''The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring'' (extended edition)]]. This scene was extended in the latter edition.
{{title}}
==Synopsis==
The scene begins with [[Elrond]] outlining the threat posed by [[Sauron]] to the representatives of the [[free peoples]] of [[Middle-earth]]. At the request of Elrond, [[Frodo]] reveals the [[One Ring]], causing all present to stir. [[Boromir]] is drawn to it, causing [[Gandalf]] to speak in [[Black Speech]], showing the evil of the Ring. Boromir however sees it as a gift, and wishes for [[Gondor]] to use it against [[Sauron]]. [[Strider]] points out the ring has no master other than Sauron. Boromir questions what a [[ranger]] would know of the Ring; [[Legolas]] reveals Strider to be [[Aragorn]], son of [[Arathorn II|Arathorn]], the [[Heir of Isildur]] and to the throne of Gondor. Boromir scorns this, saying ''"Gondor needs no king"''. 

Elrond tells the council that the ring must be destroyed, and so [[Gimli]] takes an axe and attempts to do so, but he is thrown back. The Ring is shown to be unscathed and Elrond reveals that, to destroy the Ring, it must be taken into [[Mordor]] and cast into the fires of [[Mount Doom]], where it was made. Boromir points out what he perceives to be the folly of this plan – Mordor is guarded by more than [[Orcs]], and the [[Eye of Sauron]] is ever-watching. This leads to an argument between [[Elves]] and [[Men]] and [[Dwarves]]. Eventually Frodo says he will take the ring to Mordor, leading to stunned silence. 

Gandalf, Aragorn, Legolas, Gimli, and Boromir all pledge themselves to support Frodo in his quest to destroy the ring. [[Sam]], meanwhile, has been secretly watching the council from nearby, and comes out of hiding, saying ''"Mr Frodo's not going anywhere without me!"'' Likewise, [[Merry]] and [[Pippin]] join themselves to the party, much to the bewilderment of Elrond. The nine companions are named the [[Fellowship of the Ring]] by Elrond. 

==Differences==
This scene is somewhat compressed when compared to the books. [[Bilbo]], [[Glorfindel]], and [[Galdor (elf of the Havens)|Galdor]] are absent, and much of the history of the [[The One Ring|Ring]] and the discussion regarding the authenticity of the golden ring present as being the One Ring are not included.<ref name="FRCouncil" /> Furthermore, [[Aragorn]]'s tale of capturing [[Gollum]] close to the [[Dead Marshes]] is missing, as is the discussion regarding passing the Ring to [[Tom Bombadil]].<ref name="FRCouncil">{{FR|Council}}</ref> Much of Gandalf's contributions regarding his dealings with [[Saruman]] in the book chapter were moved to the scene [[Saruman the White (scene)|Saruman the White]]. 

{{references}}

[[Category:The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring scenes|27]]