{{disambig-more|The Lord of the Rings|[[The Lord of the Rings (disambiguation)]]}}
{{Board game infobox
| name=The Lord of the Rings Roleplaying Game
| image=The Lord of the Rings Roleplaying Game - logo.png
| caption=
| type=rpg
| designer=Steven S. Long, Christian Moore, Owen M. Seyler, Ross Isaacs
| publisher=[[Decipher Inc.]]
| releasedate=[[2002]]
| players=
| ages=
}}
'''''The Lord of the Rings Roleplaying Game''''' (LOTRRPG), released by [[Decipher Inc.]] in 2002, is a [[Wikipedia:Role-playing game|role-playing game]] set in [[Middle-earth]]. The game is set in the years between ''[[The Hobbit]]'' and ''[[The Fellowship of the Ring]]'', but may be run at any time from the [[First Age|First]] to [[Fourth Age]] and contains many examples of how to do so. Sourcebooks cover the events of ''[[The Lord of the Rings]]'' and [[Peter Jackson]]'s [[The Lord of the Rings (film series)|film trilogy adaptation]].

The system for LOTRRPG is called ''CODA''. In 2003, LOTRRPG won the Origins Award for ''Best Roleplaying Game 2002''.<ref>[http://www.originsgamefair.com/awards/2002/list-of-winners Origins Award Winners (2002)] (accessed 2007-10-02)</ref>

The game was the third roleplaying game licensed by [[Middle-earth Enterprises|Tolkien Enterprises]], the others being ''[[Middle-earth Role Playing]]'' and its simplified sibling the ''[[Lord of the Rings Adventure Game]]'', both from [[Iron Crown Enterprises]].

==Races==
The character races available in the ''Lord of the Rings Roleplaying Game'' are:
*[[Dwarves]] (Khazad): Short, stocky bearded folk, strong and hardy, able to endure pain, fatigue and suffering better than other races.  Upon reaching maturity they appear old in a fashion that belies their hardiness.  They often live in subterranean kingdoms, and have a great love of craftworks, especially things made of gold, silver, and ''[[mithril]]''.
*[[Elves]] (Eldar): The oldest and wisest of races of Middle-earth, they are immortal, noble, and fair. Their kind have far clearer sight and perception than Men, and they're nimble. They are naturally aware of many things that are hidden from the Younger Children. They are divided into a number of particular kinds, primarily based on their course through elven history.  The [[Noldor]] or High Elves are those that heeded the call of the [[Valar]] and traveled across the sea, most of them later rebelling and following [[Fëanor]] back to [[Middle-earth]] in pursuit of the [[Silmaril]]s.  They are wise in Lore and Smithcraft, and created many [[Rings of Power]].  The [[Sindar]] or Grey Elves are those that heard the call, but stopped and chose to stay in [[Beleriand]].  These are the more numerous kind of elf in the Third Age, and have great love of, and talent with, music and song.  The [[Silvan Elves]] or Wood Elves are those that ceased their journey to the West before crossing the [[Misty Mountains]].  During the Third age, they live in woodland realms such as [[Lothlórien]] or caverns in the mountains of [[Mirkwood]].  They have facility with wilderness skills. 
*[[Hobbits]]:  The signature race of Tolkien, these diminutive people are a distant relation to men.  They are good-natured, hospitable and easy going folk, two to four feet in height with hair covered feet.  There are three major strains of Hobbits: [[Fallohides]], taller, slimmer, fairer, and more uncommon than their fellows, they often have more facility with language, song, and craft, and have an unusual adventurous streak.  [[Harfoots]] are the most numerous kind, and tend to be shorter and browner than others.  They are nimble with crafts, more friendly with Dwarves, and tend to stick to the custom of living in holes and tunnels.  The [[Stoors]] are broader and sturdier and most numerous in [[Buckland]].  These are the only Hobbits who know anything about boating, swimming and fishing.
*[[Men]]: The most familiar character race, these still come in several varieties available for player characters.  [[Dúnedain]] are descendants of the [[Númenóreans|Númenórean]]s, themselves descendant of [[Elros|Elros Tar-Minyatur]], twin brother of [[Elrond|Elrond Halfelven]].  The [[Men of Twilight]], including the [[Rohan#People|Rohirrim]], the [[Beornings]], [[Dunlendings]] and the majority of [[Gondor]]ians (due to centuries of interbreeding), are men who did not go to [[Númenor]] but remained in Middle-earth.  These are typical Men.  The [[Men of Darkness]] are the [[Easterlings]], the [[Haradrim]] (Southrons), and [[Variags]] of [[Khand]], most of whom have lived under the sway of [[Sauron]].  They are shorter, broader, darker of hair and eye, and duskier.  Finally, there are Wild Men, who are short and squat and live rudely in the wild, though they carry their own nobility and powers.  These include the [[Drúedain]] (Woses) who live in the forest of [[Anórien]] and the [[Lossoth]] (Snowmen of Forochel) who live in the [[Northern Waste]].

==Classes==
The character classes available in the ''Lord of the Rings Roleplaying Adventure Game'' are:
* '''Barbarian''': A warrior of the wilds who may lack some of the refined skills and weapons of other fighting men, but who make up for it with woodcraftiness and ferocity. Many Dunlendings, Drúedain, and Easterlings belong to this order.

* '''Craftsman''': A person skilled in the arts of making, able to craft items both useful and wondrous, or who serves others in some ordinary capacity. Sam Gamgee, Barliman Butterbur, many Dwarves, and the Noldorin jewelsmiths are all craftsmen.

* '''[[Lambengolmor|Loremaster]]''': One wise in the lore of Middle-earth and who, though not a true caster of spells, can use some minor or subtle magics. Denethor, Celeborn, and many Elves are loremasters.

* '''Magician''': One who works magic and casts spells based on learned lore and wisdom, but who is not nearly as powerful as a wizard.

* '''Mariner''': A sailor, one who knows how to work and helm ships great and small over the wide seas and on the Great River. Coastal Gondorians and the Corsairs of Umbar count many mariners among their number.

* '''Minstrel''': A singer of songs, teller of tales, and a chronicler of brave and noble deeds. With his words and music, he can inspire others.

* '''Noble''': A person who, due to birth, wealth, accomplishment, or the like, is regarded as of high rank in society, entitled to deference and respect from other folk. Boromir, Denethor, Aragorn, Celeborn, and even Frodo belong, at least in part, to this order.

* '''Rogue''': A person who lives and works with his wits and deft hands, often at questionable or outlawed pursuits.  He may be a spy for the Enemy, a professional treasure seeker, or simply one who prefers subtlety and guile to warfare and bloodshed. Bilbo, during his brief adventure with Thorin and company, became a member of this order. Gríma Wormtongue is also a rogue.

* '''Warrior''': People, such as guardsmen, soldiers, and archers, who are trained to fight with weapons. This is the most common order depicted in ''The Lord of the Rings'', and it may likely be so in most chronicles as well. It includes Aragorn, Boromir, Éomer, Éowyn, most Rohirrim, Beregond, Prince Imrahil, and eventually, Merry and Pippin.

== Publications ==
=== Supplements ===
*[[2002]]: ''[[The Lord of the Rings Roleplaying Game - Core Book]]''
*[[2003]]: ''[[Fell Beasts and Wondrous Magic]]''
*[[2003]]: ''[[The Lord of the Rings Roleplaying Game: Moria|Moria]]''
*[[2003]]: ''[[The Fellowship of the Ring Sourcebook]]''
*[[2003]]: ''[[The Two Towers Sourcebook]]''
*[[2005]]: ''[[The Lord of the Rings Roleplaying Game: Isengard|Isengard]]''
*[[2005]]: ''[[Paths of the Wise: The Guide to Magicians and Loremasters]]'' 
*[[2005]]: ''[[Helm's Deep (sourcebook)|Helm's Deep]]''

The supplements ''Fields of Battle: The Guide to Barbarians & Warriors'', ''Return of the King Sourcebook'', and ''Rohan: Among the Horse-Lords'' were planned but never released.<ref>[http://lotrcollectornotes.wordpress.com/decipher-rpgs/ Decipher RPGs] at [http://lotrcollectornotes.wordpress.com/ LotR Collector Notes] (accessed 20 June 2011)</ref>

=== Adventure Games ===
* ''[[The Lord of the Rings Roleplaying Adventure Game]]''
* ''[[The Two Towers Roleplaying Adventure Game]]''

=== Accessories ===
*(2002) ''[[Maps of Middle-earth|Maps of Middle-earth: The Lands of Middle-earth]]
*(2002) ''Hero's Journal''
*(2003) ''[[Maps of Middle-earth: Cities and Strongholds]]''
*(2003) ''Narrator's Screen''

{{references}}
{{rpg}}
{{title|italics}}
[[Category:LOTRRPG| ]]
[[Category:Publications by title|Lord of the Rings Roleplaying Game]]