{{disambig-more|The Hobbit|[[The Hobbit (disambiguation)]]}}
{{board game infobox
| image = The Hobbit Adventure Boardgame.jpg
| name=The Hobbit Adventure Boardgame
| designer=Jean Vanaise, Philippe Janssens
| illustrator=[[Angus McBride]] (cover)<br>Jo Hartwig (graphic design & board art)
| development=Bernd Dietrich, [[Pete Fenlon]], Jean Vanaise, [[Coleman Charlton]]
| publisher=[[Iron Crown Enterprises]]
| releasedate=[[1994]]
| players=2-4
| ages=10+
| ice=2222
}}
'''''The Hobbit Adventure Boardgame''''' is a 1994 board game loosely based on the events in [[J.R.R. Tolkien]]'s ''[[The Hobbit]]''.

== Back Cover Text ==

''The Hobbit Adventure Boardgame'' is a fun, fast-moving fantasy boardgame based on J.R.R. Tolkien's classic bestseller. Desiged for 2-4 players and playable in 1–2 hours, it is an ideal choice for an evening's entertainment. Simple but clever rules make it both easy to learn and full of replay value.

It only takes about 15 minutes to master ''The Hobbit Adventure Boardgame'' rulesbook. Then you just unfold the full-color, mounted mapboard, select a plastic Hobbit, deal out the coins and life points, and start your journey across Middle-earth. Along the way, you'll explore sites, battle monsters, discover treasure, acquire artifacts, and challenge your opponents with tricky riddles. Once you're strong enough, you'll journey north to Angmar to battle a foul Dragon, hoping to be the first halfling to secure his great hoard.

''The Hobbit Adventure Boardgame'' box includes:
*'''Gameboard''' — A beautifully-rendered, mounted mapboard, painted by the award-winning artist Jo Hartwig and detailing northwestern Middle-earth.
*'''Cards''' — 142 full color playing cards divided into eight categories covering riddles, equipment, coins, rest, magic, adventures, risk, and danger.
*'''Hobbits''' — 4 plastic Hobbits, each a different color and standing over an inch tall.
*'''Coins and Life Points''' — plastic counters so you can keep track of health and wealth.
*'''Dice''' — 5 dice, including three custom combat dice, an illustrated movement die, and a standard die.
*'''Rules'''.

==External links==
*[http://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/1586/the-hobbit-adventure-boardgame The Hobbit Adventure Boardgame] at [http://boardgamegeek.com/ BoardGameGeek]
{{DEFAULTSORT:Hobbit Adventure Boardgame, The}}
[[Category:Board games]]