{{sources}}
{{disambig-more|Two Towers|[[Two Towers (disambiguation)]]}}
{{film infobox
| image = The Lord of the Rings - The Two Towers - Ensemble poster.jpg
| caption = 
| name=The Two Towers
| director=[[Peter Jackson]]
| producer=Peter Jackson<br>Barrie M. Osborne<br>[[Fran Walsh]]
| writer='''Book:'''<br>[[J.R.R. Tolkien]]<br>'''Screenplay:'''<br>[[Fran Walsh]]<br>[[Philippa Boyens]]<br>Peter Jackson
| narrator=
| starring= see below
| music=[[Howard Shore]]
| cinematography=[[Andrew Lesnie]]
| editing=Michael J. Horton
| studio=[[WingNut Films]]<br>[[New Line Cinema]]
| distributor=[[New Line Cinema]]
| released=[[December 18]], [[2002]]
| runtime='''Theatrical:'''<br>179 min.<br>'''Extended Edition:'''<br>223 min.
| country=New Zealand & USA
| language=English
| budget= $94 million
| website=[http://www.lordoftherings.net Official website]
| imdb_id=0120737
}}
'''''The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers''''' is a film which was directed by [[Peter Jackson]], with a theatrical runtime of 179 minutes (2 hours, 59 minutes). It is the second part in [[The Lord of the Rings (film series)|The Lord of the Rings film trilogy]], following ''[[The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring]]''. It's screenplay is written by Peter Jackson, [[Fran Walsh]] and [[Philippa Boyens]]. It is an adaptation of the book ''[[The Two Towers]]'', the second part of the three-volume novel ''[[The Lord of the Rings]]'' by [[J.R.R. Tolkien]], although some of the later events are held over to the later third movie, ''[[The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King]]''. The film premiered at Ziegfeld Theatre in New York City, on Thursday, 5 December, [[2002]]. It was very well received critically and was an enormous box-office success, making over $900 million worldwide (making it the fourth most successful film of all time at that point in time).

==Synopsis==
The surviving members of the [[Fellowship of the Ring]] have split into three groups. Frodo and Sam face many perils on their continuing quest to save [[Middle-earth]] by destroying [[the One Ring]] in the fires of [[Mount Doom]]. Merry and Pippin escape from the [[Orcs]] and must convince the [[Ents]] to join the battle against evil. Aragorn, Gimli and Legolas encounter a mysteriously transformed Gandalf and battle [[Saruman]]'s army at [[Helm's Deep]].
==Plot==

===Frodo and Sam's journey===
After awakening from a dream of Gandalf fighting the [[Balrogs|Balrog]] in [[Moria]], [[Frodo Baggins]] and [[Samwise Gamgee]] found themselves lost in the [[Emyn Muil]] near [[Mordor]]. As they continued on their journey, they found that they were being followed by [[Gollum]], who wished to reclaim the [[The One Ring|One Ring]]. The [[Hobbits]] captured Gollum, but Frodo sparred his life and allowed Gollum to be their guide. Sam protested this decision, but Frodo advised that they needed Gollum's help in order to make their way into Mordor.

===Rohan===
Entering the kingdom of [[Rohan]], [[Three Hunters]] ([[Aragorn]], [[Legolas]], and [[Gimli]]) tracked a band of [[Uruk-hai]] in an attempt to rescue the Hobbits [[Meriadoc Brandybuck|Merry]] and [[Peregrin Took|Pippin]]. The Uruk-hai were set upon by a raiding party of [[Rohirrim]], which allowed Merry and Pippin to escape into [[Fangorn Forest]]. Following the raid, the Rohirrim surrounded the Three Hunters and inquired about their business in Rohan. After momentary tensions between the two groups, Aragorn explained that they were looking for the two Hobbits. The leader of the Rohirrim, [[Éomer]], then explained that he had been exiled by [[Théoden|King Théoden]] of Rohan, who was under the control of the [[Wizards|Wizard]] [[Saruman]] and his servant, [[Gríma|Grima Wormtongue]]. Éomer indicated that the Rohirrim left no survivors during their raid on the Uruk-hai, and that Merry and Pippin were likely slain. 

Aragorn despaired, but while doing so he started to look at tracks left by the raiding party and the Uruk-hai. He followed the tracks and happened upon a broach that was attached to the cloaks [[Galadriel]] had given the [[Fellowship of the Ring]] before they departed [[Lothlórien]]. Having surmised that "not idly do the leaves of Lórien fall", Aragorn believed the broach was dropped intentionally in hopes that members of the Fellowship would find it. After coming to this conclusion, Aragorn led the Three Hunters into Fangorn Forest.

===Gandalf returns===
While wandering through the Forest, the Three Hunters were set upon by a figure clad in white robes. Thinking it was Saruman, they attacked the figure, but their weapons were useless against him. After their attack failed, the white robed figure revealed himself to be Gandalf who explained that, after being slain in his battle with the Balrog, he was resurrected with enhanced powers as Gandalf the White in order to assist the [[Free peoples|free Peoples]] of Middle-earth in their [[War of the Ring|War]] against [[Sauron]].

Gandalf then led the Hunters to Rohan's capital, [[Edoras]]. Upon their arrival, Gandalf wrenched Théoden from Saruman's control. Furious upon his awakening, the King desired to kill the traitor Wormtongue, but Aragorn advised him against it. Wormtongue took this opportunity to flee. After learning of Saruman's plans to destroy Rohan with his Uruk-hai, Théoden evacuated his people to the fortress of the [[Hornburg]] in [[Helm's Deep]]. While in Edoras, Aragorn met and befriended Théoden's niece, [[Éowyn]], who began to fall in love with him. Gandalf then left Edoras to find Éomer and his followers, hoping they would return to fight once more for their king. 

When the evacuees travelling to Helm's Deep were attacked by Saruman's [[Wargs|Warg]]-riding [[Orcs]], Aragorn participated in the counter-attack, but became entangled in a Warg-rider's saddle and was dragged over a cliff and presumed dead. He was later found by Théodred's horse, Brego, and rode to Helm's Deep, where he witnessed Saruman's army amassing near the fortress.

===Arwen's choice===
In Rivendell, [[Arwen]] spoke with her father Elrond. Elrond advised his daughter that, if she remained in Middle-earth, she would outlive Aragorn by millennia and that she would linger alone and grieving for ages. Arwen heeded her father's council and began the process of departing for [[Valinor]]. Elrond was then contacted by Galadriel, who convinced him that the Elves should send a force of [[Elves]] to Helm's Deep.

===The last march of the Ents===
In Fangorn, Merry and Pippin met the [[Ents|Ent]] [[Treebeard]]. After convincing Treebeard that they were not enemies, the Hobbits were brought to an [[Entmoot]] where, after a long and slow discussion, the Ents decided not participate in the coming war. Seemingly having failed in enlisting the assistance of the Ents, Pippin asked Treebeard to take the Hobbits toward Isengard. As they approached the fortress, they witnessed the devastated surrounding forest, which had been cut down by Saruman's Orcs. Treebeard grew furious and decided to gather the Ents to storm Isengard. The ensuing attack was successful, and Saruman was trapped in his tower.

===The Battle of the Hornburg===
Having been warned by Aragorn about the coming Uruk-hai army, Théoden prepared for the battle to come. Being vastly outnumbered, hope was kindled with the arrival of [[Galadhrim]] Elves shortly before the arrival of Saruman's forces. A ferocious [[Battle of the Hornburg|battle]] ensued, an Uruk-hai [[Berserker]] breached the outer wall with explosives. The defenders retreated into the keep, and Aragorn convinced Théoden to meet the Uruk-hai in one last desperate charge. At dawn, as he promised Aragorn, Gandalf and Éomer arrived with the Rohirrim and routed Saruman's forces. The surviving Uruk-hai fled into Fangorn Forest, where they were promptly bludgeoned to death by the trees.

===The Rangers of Ithilien===
As they journeyed to Mordor, Gollum led Frodo and Sam through the [[Dead Marshes]] to the [[Black Gate]]. Seeing that the Gate was heavily defended, Gollum recommended they enter Mordor by an alternate route. Shortly afterward, Frodo and Sam were captured by [[Rangers of Ithilien]] led by [[Faramir]], the younger brother of [[Boromir]]. In order to save Gollum from being slain by the Rangers, Frodo helped them capture Gollum. After learning of the One Ring, Faramir travelled with the Hobbits to [[Gondor]] to bring the Ring to his father, [[Denethor]], who was the [[Steward of Gondor]]. As they passed through the city of [[Osgiliath]], Frodo attempted to explain the true nature of the Ring to Faramir. Sam further explained that Boromir was driven mad by its power. Shortly thereafter, a [[Nazgûl]] riding a [[Fell beasts|Fell beast]] nearly captures Frodo, who began to waver due to  the Ring's power, but Sam narrowly saved him. Faramir, impressed by this feat, released them.

Gollum, having felt betrayed by Frodo's complicity in his capture, decided that he would reclaim the Ring by leading Frodo and Sam to [[Shelob]] in [[Cirith Ungol]].

==Scenes==
#[[The Foundations of Stone]]
#[[Elven Rope (scene)|Elven Rope]] *
#[[The Taming of Sméagol (scene)|The Taming of Sméagol]] **
#[[The Uruk-hai (scene)|The Uruk-hai]] **
#[[The Three Hunters]]
#[[The Burnings of the Westfold]] **
#[[Massacre at the Fords of Isen]] *
#[[The Banishment of Éomer]] **
#[[On the Trail of the Uruk-hai]]
#[[Night Camp at Fangorn]] **
#[[The Riders of Rohan (scene)|The Riders of Rohan]]
#[[The Fate of Merry and Pippin]]
#[[Treebeard (scene)|Treebeard]]
#[[The Passage of the Marshes (scene)|The Passage of the Marshes]] **
#[[The White Rider (scene)|The White Rider]] **
#[[The Songs of the Entwives]] *
#[[The Heir of Númenor]] *
#[[The Black Gate is Closed (scene)|The Black Gate is Closed]]
#[[Ent Draft]] *
#[[The King of the Golden Hall (scene)|The King of the Golden Hall]] **
#[[The Funeral of Théodred]] *
#[[Simbelmynë on the Burial Mounds]]
#[[The King's Decision]]
#[[Brego (scene)|Brego]] *
#[[The Ring of Barahir]] *
#[[A Daughter of Kings]] **
#[[Exodus from Edoras]]
#[[The Forests of Ithilien]]
#[[Gollum and Sméagol]]
#[[Of Herbs and Stewed Rabbit (scene)|Of Herbs and Stewed Rabbit]] **
#[[Dwarf Women]] **
#[[One of the Dúnedain]] *
#[[The Evenstar (The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers scene)|The Evenstar]] **
#[[The Wolves of Isengard]]
#[[Helm's Deep (scene)|Helm's Deep]] **
#[[Isengard Unleashed]]
#[[The Grace of the Valar]]
#[[Arwen's Fate]]
#[[The Story Foreseen from Lórien]]
#[[The Window on the West (scene)|The Window on the West]] **
#[[Sons of the Steward]] *
#[[The Forbidden Pool (scene)|The Forbidden Pool]] **
#[[Aragorn's Return]]
#[[Entmoot (scene)|Entmoot]]
#[[The Glittering Caves]] **
#[["Where is the Horse and the Rider?"]]
#[["Don't Be Hasty Master Meriadoc!"]] *
#[[The Host of the Eldar]]
#[[The Battle of the Hornburg]] **
#[[Old Entish (scene)|Old Entish]]
#[[The Breach of the Deeping Wall]]
#[[The Entmoot Decides]]
#[[The Retreat of the Hornburg]] **
#[[Master Peregrin's Plan]]
#[[Osgiliath (scene)|Osgiliath]]
#[[The Last March of the Ents]] **
#[[The Nazgûl Attack]]
#[[Forth Eorlingas]]
#[[The Flooding of Isengard]]
#[[The Tales That Really Mattered...]]
#[[Fangorn Comes to Helm's Deep]] *
#[[The Final Tally]] *
#[[Flotsam and Jetsam (scene)|Flotsam and Jetsam]] *
#[[Farewell to Faramir]] *
#[["The Battle for Middle-earth is About to Begin"]]
#[[Gollum's Plan]]
#Credits
#Official Fan Club Credits *

<nowiki> *</nowiki> denotes a scene only available in the Extended Edition cut of the film.

<nowiki> **</nowiki> denotes a scene which includes extended content only available in the Extended Edition cut of the film.

==Cast==
{| class="wikitable"
|- bgcolor="# CCCCCC"
!Actor!!Role
|-
|[[Bruce Allpress]]||[[Aldor (film character)|Aldor]]
|-
|[[Sean Astin]]||[[Samwise Gamgee|Sam]]
|-
|[[John Bach]]||[[Madril]]
|-
|[[Sala Baker]]||[[Lugdush|Man Flesh Uruk]]
|-
|[[Cate Blanchett]]||[[Galadriel]]
|-
|[[Orlando Bloom]]||[[Legolas]]
|-
|[[Billy Boyd]]||[[Peregrin Took|Pippin]]
|-
|[[Jed Brophy]]||[[Sharku]]/[[Snaga (orc of Isengard)|Snaga]]
|-
|[[Sam Comery]]||[[Éothain (film character)|Éothain]]
|-
|[[Brad Dourif]]||[[Gríma|Wormtongue]]
|-
|[[Calum Gittins]]||[[Haleth (film character)|Haleth]]
|-
|[[Bernard Hill]]||[[Théoden]]
|-
|[[Bruce Hopkins]]||[[Gamling]]
|-
|[[Paris Howe Strewe]]||[[Théodred]]
|-
|[[Christopher Lee]]||[[Saruman]]
|-
|[[Nathaniel Lees]]||[[Uglúk]]
|-
|[[John Leigh]]||[[Háma]]
|-
|[[Robbie Magasiva]]||[[Mauhúr]]
|-
|[[Robyn Malcolm]]||[[Morwen (film character)|Morwen]]
|-
|[[Ian McKellen]]||[[Gandalf]]
|-
|[[Dominic Monaghan]]||[[Meriadoc Brandybuck|Merry]]
|-
|[[Viggo Mortensen]]||[[Aragorn]]
|-
|[[Miranda Otto]]||[[Éowyn]]
|-
|[[Craig Parker]]||[[Haldir]]
|-
|[[Bruce Phillips]]||[[Rohirrim|Rohan Soldier]]
|-
|[[Robert Pollock]]||[[Orcs of Mordor|Mordor Orc]]
|-
|[[John Rhys-Davies]]||[[Gimli]]/[[Treebeard|Voice of Treebeard]]
|-
|[[Andy Serkis]]||[[Gollum]]
|-
|[[Olivia Tennet]]||[[Freda]]
|-
|[[Ray Trickitt|Ray Trickett]]||[[Bereg (film character)|Bereg]]
|-
|[[Liv Tyler]]||[[Arwen]]
|-
|[[Karl Urban]]||[[Éomer]]
|-
|[[Stephen Ure]]||[[Grishnákh]]
|-
|[[Hugo Weaving]]||[[Elrond]]
|-
|[[David Wenham]]||[[Faramir]]
|-
|[[Elijah Wood]]||[[Frodo Baggins|Frodo]]
|-
|[[Victoria Beynon-Cole]], Lee Hartley, Philip Grieve||[[Orcs|Hero Orcs]]
|-
|Billy Jackson, [[Katie Jackson]]||[[Rohirrim|Cute Rohan Refugee Children]]
|-
|[[Sean Bean]]||[[Boromir]] ([[The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers (extended edition)|Extended Edition]] only)
|-
|Timothy Lee||[[Dunlendings|Wildman]] ([[The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers (extended edition)|Extended Edition]] only)
|-
|[[John Noble]]||[[Denethor]] ([[The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers (extended edition)|Extended Edition]] only)
|-
|Phillip Spencer-Harris||[[Ranger of Ithilien|Ranger 1]] ([[The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers (extended edition)|Extended Edition]] only)
|}

===Uncredited===
{| class="wikitable"
|- bgcolor="#CCCCCC"
!Actor!!Role
|-
|Richard Alexander, Geoff Allen, Daniel Andrews, Sean Button, Ryan Coray, Rodney Cook, Tack Daniel, Augie Davis, Mana Hira Davis, Shane Dawson, David Gatward Ferguson, Siaosi Fonua, Winham Hammond, Michael Harrison, Lani Jackson, Ralph Johnson, Sam Kelly, Greg Lane, Lance Louez, Joseph Mika-Hunt, Dean Morganty, Francis Mountjoy, Nooroa Poa, Allan Poppleton, Ken Stratton, Robbie Titchener, Tim Wong, Robert Young||[[Uruk-Hai]]
|-
|Geoff Allen, Daniel Andrews, Ben Barrington, Mana Hira Davis, Michael Harrison, Ron Kerkmeester, Joseph Mika-Hunt, Francis Mountjoy, Matthew J. Saville||[[Gondorians|Gondorian Soldiers]]
|-
|Geoff Allen, Frazer Anderson, Daniel Andrews, Ben Barrington, Mana Hira Davis, Siaosi Fonua, Michael Harrison, Paul Holmes, Ralph Johnson, Ron Kerkmeester, Lance Louez, Francis Mountjoy, Shaneel Sidal, Melvin Te Wani, John Turner||[[Orcs]]
|-
|Geoff Allen, Colin Bleasdale, Mana Hira Davis, Aron Eastwood, Michael Harrison, Davey Hughes, Ralph Johnson, Ron Kerkmeester, Richard Knowles, Ken Stratton, John Turner||[[Rohirrim|Rohan Soldiers]]
|-
|Frazer Anderson, Ben Barrington, Michael Harrison, Dean Morganty, Ken Stratton||[[Ranger of Ithilien|Rangers]]
|-
|Jarl Benzon, [[Jørn Benzon]], Ben Britton, Alexia Fairbrother, [[Daniel Falconer]], Kester Fordham, Ben Fransham, Jonathan Harding, Gareth Jensen, Sam Kelly, Sandro Kopp||[[Elves|Elven Warriors]]
|-
|Jarl Benzon||[[Rohirrim|Rohan Stable Boy]]
|-
|Owen Black, [[Daniel Falconer]]||[[Elves|Rivendell Elves]]
|-
|Dorothy Anne Bonner, June Hancock, Dra McKay, Dianne Smith||[[Rohirrim|Rohan Women]]
|-
|Ben Britton||[[Rohirrim|Man of Rohan]]
|-
|Riley Brophy||[[Rohirrim|Cute Rohan Refugee Child]]
|-
|Alistair Browning||[[Damrod]]
|-
|Alix Bushnell, Kelly Corbishley, Frank Goldingham, Lew Hewson, Jaime Lawrence, Cameron Lemon, Miranda Rivers, Samuel E. Shore, Sarah Thomas||[[Rohirrim|Rohan Refugees]]
|-
|Erin Cassie||[[Rohirrim|Village Girl]]
|-
|Robert Catto, Michael Fowler, Jaime Lawrence, Francis Mountjoy, Samuel E. Shore||[[Elves]]
|-
|Mana Hira Davis, Shane Dawson, Clint Elvy, Are Manea Karati, Jeremy Sciascia||[[Haradrim|Harad Warriors]]
|-
|Karlos Drinkwater||[[Easterlings|Easterling Warrior]]
|-
|Frank Edwards, Tony Shaw||[[Rohirrim|Rohan Men]]
|-
|Michael Harrison, Ron Kerkmeester, Paul Norell, Ken Stratton, Robbie Titchener||[[Easterlings]]
|-
|Michael Harrison, Michael Lawrence||[[Dunlendings|Wildmen]]
|-
|Lucas Hayward, James Ordish||[[Rohirrim|Rohan Boys]]
|-
|Dan Hennah, Alan Lee, Arnold Montey||[[Rohirrim|Rohan Recruits]]
|-
|Lew Hewson, Gareth Reeves||[[Elves|Fighting Elves]]
|-
|Jason Hood||[[Rohirrim|Théoden's Royal Guard]]
|-
|[[Peter Jackson]]||[[Rohirrim|Spear-Throwing Rohan Soldier]]
|-
|Sam La Hood||[[Orcs|Orc Pitmaster]]
|-
|[[Greg Lane]]||[[Berserker|Berserker Torch-Bearer]]
|-
|Don Langridge, Robbie Titchener||[[Rohirrim|Rohan Guards]]
|-
|Jono Manks||[[Ringwraith|Twilight Ringwraith]]
|-
|[[Brent McIntyre]]||[[Witch-king]]
|-
|Dean Morganty, Ken Stratton||[[Haradrim|Haradrim Warriors]]
|-
|[[Henry Mortensen]]||[[Rohirrim|Rohan Boy Recruit]]
|-
|Barrie M. Osborne||[[Rohirrim|Rock-throwing Rohan Soldier]]
|-
|Wayne Phillips||[[Gondorians|Captain of the Guards]]
|-
|Campbell Rousselle||[[Isengarders|Tree-cutting Orc]]
|-
|Nancy Ruck||[[Rohirrim|Rohan Refugee Child]]
|-
|Allan Smith||[[Elves|Dead Marshes Elf]]
|-
|Ken Stratton||[[Isengarders|Isengard Orc]]
|-
|[[Marcus Thorne]]||[[Orcs|Featured Orc]]
|-
|[[Greg Tozer]]||[[Rohirrim|Conscripting Rohan Soldier]]
|-
|[[Piripi Waretini]]||[[Uruk-Hai|Uruk-Hai Warrior]]
|-
|[[Hannah Wood]]||[[Rohirrim|Rohan Woman in Cave]]
|-
|John Wraight||[[Rohirrim|Stable Hand]]
|}

==Trivia==
{{Incomplete}}
Below is a list of trivia from Amazon's "X-Ray" feature that accompanied the film upon streaming it on Prime Video.

==Filming locations==
<table class="wikitable">
<tr bgcolor="# CCCCCC">
<th>Fictional<br>Location</th><th>Specific Location<br>in New Zealand</th><th>General Area<br>in New Zealand</th>
</tr><tr>
<td>Plains of [[Rohan]]</td><td>Greenstone Station</td><td>Kinloch</td>
</tr><tr>
<td>[[Rohan]]</td><td>Poolburn Lake</td><td>Maniototo Plain</td>
</tr><tr>
<td>[[Edoras]]</td><td>[[Mount Sunday]]</td><td>Rangitata Valley</td>
</tr><tr>
<td>[[Dead Marshes]]</td><td>Kepler Mire</td><td>Te Anau</td>
</tr><tr>
<td>The [[Black Gate]]</td><td>Rangipo Desert</td><td>Lake Taupo</td>
</tr><tr>
<td>[[Helm's Deep]]</td><td>Hayward's Hill</td><td>Lower Hutt</td>
</tr>
</table>

==Deviations from the source material==

Jackson's ''The Two Towers'' differs from Tolkien's in several important ways. Arwen does not appear in the second book at all. Interviews with Jackson and the other writers on the extended DVD version of the movie make it clear that they are fully aware of the implications of these changes in terms of the original story, and have chosen to make them not out of ignorance but in order to make the story work better in terms of motion picture storytelling.

Notably, the meaning of the title itself, 'The Two Towers', has been changed. Tolkien considered many possible combinations, but eventually settled on [[Orthanc]] and [[Minas Morgul]] being the 'two towers'<ref name="hs">{{webcite|author=[[Wayne G. Hammond]] & [[Christina Scull]]|articleurl=https://www.hammondandscull.com/papers/Hammond_Scull_Scholars_Forum.html#r50|articlename=Truth or Consequences: A Cautionary Tale of Tolkien Studies|website=HS|accessed=6 January 2022}}, footnote 50</ref> However, in the Jackson's movie, Saruman instead names them as Orthanc and [[Barad-dûr]], which is also reflected in the movie poster.

====Structure====

Tolkien divided ''The Two Towers'' into two distinct parts. The first told the stories of Merry, Pippin, Aragorn, Gimli, Legolas and Gandalf. The second concerned Frodo, Sam and Gollum. Jackson chose to intercut between the two to present the events in chronological order.

====Events====

Jackson and his co-writers added several events to the story, notably:
*In the movie, Faramir speaks of taking the Ring from Frodo, for the defence of Gondor; in the book, he denies having any such desire: ''I would not take this thing, if it lay by the highway.'' he said.<ref>''J.R.R Tolkien, The Lord of the Rings, The Two Towers, Book Four, Chapter V (The Window on the west), p.671''</ref> According to Jackson, this does not work dramatically, as Faramir has no "character arc" (i.e. he does not change as a character from his first scene to his last). Jackson justifies this change as a means of making Faramir seem more of a rounded character as well as not wanting the line to deflate the perceptions of the Ring's power.
*In the movie, Faramir takes Frodo, Sam and Gollum to the besieged city of [[Osgiliath]], but subsequently lets them go. In the theatrical version, it is not clear how Frodo and his companions get back from Osgiliath to [[Ithilien]], but this is explained in the extended cut - they escape through the ruined city's sewers and so make their way out behind the enemy lines. (It is not explained why the Gondorians have made no military use of this apparent asset.)
*An attack on the Rohirrim travelling to Helm's Deep by Orcs mounted on [[Wargs]] results in Aragorn's near death; he is revived by a vision of Arwen in a dream sequence. Nothing like this is present in the book.
*Galadriel persuades Elrond (via long-distance [[ósanwe|telepathy]]) to send Elven archers to Helm's Deep. Interestingly, they appear nonetheless to be Elves of [[Lothlórien]], one of whom ([[Haldir]]) we met previously in the Golden Wood. Jackson originally planned to have Arwen herself fighting at Helm's Deep and filmed some scenes along those lines, but abandoned that tack. It is still possible to pick her out in the battle, as some footage was used in the Extended Edition. This addition might have been inspired by a single line spoken in passing by Legolas, when he was waiting for the coming forces of Saruman at the walls of Helm's Deep: ''But even more would I give for a hundred good archers of Mirkwood. We shall need them. The Rohirrim have good bowmen after their fashion, but there are too few here, too few''.<ref>''J.R.R. Tolkien, The Lord of the Rings, The Two Towers, Book Three, Chapter VII ("Helm's Deep"), page.532''</ref>
*Arwen has a vision of her future which is taken somewhat loosely from ''The Tale of Aragorn and Arwen'' in the books' Appendices.<ref>{{App|Tale}}</ref>
*Elrond almost forcibly sends Arwen "to the West"([[Aman]]). Her final decision on the matter, and her reason for making it, is revealed in ''The Return of the King''.

Two important events from Tolkien's ''The Two Towers'' did not make it into the film, but were held over for the next one:
*Gandalf and Saruman's confrontation at [[Isengard]]; this was originally intended to appear at the beginning of ''The Return of the King'', but a late decision by Peter Jackson meant that this scene was not part of the theatrical version, though it has since been included in the extended cut.
*Sam and Frodo's encounter with the monstrous [[Shelob]]. (This is foreshadowed by [[Gollum]]'s line: "We could let ''her'' do it!") Shelob's Lair did indeed feature prominently in the third film.

====Characters====

Four of the characters in the film are presented somewhat differently than their counterparts in the book:
*Faramir requires much more convincing to let Sam and Frodo continue on their quest; in the book he immediately recognizes the wisdom of permitting them to leave freely.<ref>''J.R.R Tolkien, The Lord of the Rings, The Two Towers, Book Four, Chapter V (The Window on the west), p.672''</ref>
*Treebeard, chief among the Ents, is unaware of what is happening on the borders of his forest and has to be "tricked" into attacking Isengard. In the theatrical release he is not seen sending [[Huorns]] to Helm's Deep, but does so in the extended video version - see below.
*Continuing a trend from the first movie, [[Elrond]] (who doesn't appear in the book) is much more protective of Arwen and is almost antagonistic toward [[Aragorn]], thus the [[Thingol]] portrayal and the stereotypical "father-daughter theme" are both apparent.
*King [[Théoden]]'s reaction upon learning of [[Gríma]]'s treachery differs greatly from the novel: In the book, he offers Wormtongue a chance to redeem himself by riding to war with the Rohirrim,<ref>''J.R.R. Tolkien, The Lord of the Rings, The Two Towers, Book Three, Chapter VI ("The King of the Golden Hall"), page.520''</ref> whereas in the film, a dazed Théoden tries to personally execute the traitor.

Théoden's attitude towards the coming conflict is also presented differently in Jackson's film: In the novel, Théoden chooses to ride to war, and only goes to Helm's Deep in order to assist [[Erkenbrand]]'s forces,<ref>''J.R.R. Tolkien, The Lord of the Rings, The Two Towers, Book Three, Chapter VII ("Helm's Deep"), page.528''</ref> which had been dealt a defeat by Saruman's armies. In the film, he opts to avoid open confrontation, and treats Helm's Deep as a shelter for the civilian population of Rohan. Only the ensuing orc siege forces him into battle.

==Score==
*[[The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers - Original Motion Picture Soundtrack]]
*[[The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers - The Complete Recordings]]

==Awards and critical opinion==
*Academy Awards
**Winner: Visual Effects, Sound Editing.
**Nominee: Best Picture, Best Art Direction - Set Decoration, Best Editing, and Best Sound.
*American Film Institute: Digital Effects, Production Design, Movie of the Year
*Apex Awards: Best Actor in a Supporting Role (Viggo Mortensen), Best Production Design, Best Original Song Score, Best Visual Effects, Best Make-up
*2003 Art Directors Guild: Best Production Design (Period or Fantasy feature Film)
*Australian Film Awards: Best Foreign Film
*British Academy Film Awards: Best Costume Design, Best Special Visual Effects, Orange Film of the Year (voted on by the public)
*Broadcast Film Critics Association: Best Digital Acting Performance (Gollum)
*Central Ohio Film Critics: Best Cinematography
*Cinemarati Awards: Best Film, Best Ensemble Cast, Best Director (Peter Jackson), Best Film Editing
*Dallas Fort Worth Film Critics: Best Director (Peter Jackson)
*Empire Awards: Best Picture
*Golden Satellite Awards: Outstanding Motion Picture Ensemble, Best Visual Effects
*Golden Trailer Awards: Best Action Trailer
*Hollywood Makeup Artist and Hairstylist Guild Awards: Best Character Makeup, Best Character Hair Styling, Best Special Makeup Effects
*Hugo Award (World Science Fiction Society): Best Dramatic Presentation - Long Form
*International 3-D Awards (computer graphics industry): Best Feature Film VFX (Weta)
*Kansas City Film Critics: Best Director
*Las Vegas Film Critics: Best Director (Peter Jackson), Best Costume Design, Best Film Editing, Best Visual Effects
*Phoenix Film Critics Awards [http://www.moviecitynews.com/awards/phoenix_fca.htm]: "Best Picture", "Best Ensemble Acting", "Best Screenplay Adapted from Another Medium", "Best Cinematography", "Best Production Design", "Best Visual Effects", and "Best Makeup" "Gollum's Song", the theme played during the end credits, won the award for "Best Original Song". The song was written by [[Howard Shore]] and sung by the Icelandic singer [[Emiliana Torrini]].
*Rotten Tomatoes Awards: Best Film
*Saturn Awards: Best Fantasy Film, Best Costume (Ngila Dickson), Best Supporting Actor (Andy Serkis)
*Visual Effects Society Awards: Best Special Effects, Best Effects in Art Direction, Best Visual Effects in Photography, Best Models and Miniatures, Best Performance by an Actor in an Effects Film, Best Character Animation in a Live-Action Feature Film, Best Compositing and Visual Effects in an Effects-Driven Film
*Followers of the Oscars predicted that the movie had a poor chance of winning Best Picture, because it received no other nominations in the major Oscar categories (Director, Actor and Actress, Supporting Actor and Actress and Screenplay). This proved to be true, though the film did win the Academy Award for Visual Effects. It was speculated that the Academy was biding its time for the concluding film, ''[[The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King|The Return of the King]]'', to be released so that they could honour Peter Jackson for creating such a successful and acclaimed film trilogy.  The third film was awarded 11 Oscars in 2004.

==Video release==

The theatrical edition of the movie was released on VHS and DVD on Tuesday, August 26, 2003. The DVD was a 2-disc set with extras on the second disc. This was intended to be a simultaneous worldwide release, but some British stores began selling the videos on Friday 22 because it was a Bank Holiday weekend, much to the ire of the film's UK distributor, which has threatened to withhold advance supplies of subsequent video releases.

An extended version of the movie including 44 minutes of additional material was released on video on Tuesday, November 18, 2003, with a total of 223 minutes (3 hours, 43 minutes). One of the additional scenes features Sean Bean and John Noble, who do not appear in the theatrical version, in a flashback in which brothers [[Boromir]] and [[Faramir]] are seen together with their father [[Denethor]]. This is available on VHS and on a 4-disc DVD set, with the movie on discs 1 and 2 including four audio commentaries by the crew and actors, and extensive bonus material on discs 3 and 4. There is also a "Special Edition" DVD package containing the 4-disc set, a sculpture of [[Gollum]], a booklet about the process of designing Gollum for the movie and a short DVD documentary on the process of designing collectible sculptures based on the movies' characters and artefacts.

In December, 2003 there were also limited back-to-back theatrical releases of the extended versions of ''The Fellowship of the Ring'' and ''The Two Towers'' followed by premieres of ''The Return of the King'', in all nine hours and seventeen minutes long.

==References in other media==
In the ''Foster's Home for Imaginary Friends'' episode "Duchess of Wails", the end of the episode is a homage to [[Battle of the Hornburg|the attack on Helm's Deep]] from the movie. Certain lines are used in the scene's dialogue as well as memorable visual moments, like the initial volley of arrows (tomatoes in the episode) are also used.
{{references}}
{{Screen}}
{{lordoftheringsfilms}}
{{title|italics}}

[[Category:The Lord of the Rings (film series)]]

[[de:Der Herr der Ringe: Die Zwei Türme (Film)]]
[[fi:The Two Towers (2002)]]