{{disambig-more|Mirror of Galadriel|[[Mirror of Galadriel (disambiguation)]]}}
{{chapter
| image=Alan Lee - The Mirror of Galadriel.jpg
| title=The Mirror of Galadriel
| book=The Fellowship of the Ring
| number=19
| event=The [[Fellowship of the Ring|Company]] meets [[Celeborn]] and [[Galadriel]]; Galadriel shows [[Frodo Baggins|Frodo]] and [[Samwise Gamgee|Samwise]] her [[Mirror of Galadriel|mirror]].
| date=[[15 February]] {{TA|3019|n}}
| location=[[Lothl贸rien|L贸rien]]
| perspective=[[Frodo Baggins|Frodo]] and [[Samwise Gamgee|Samwise]]
| previous=Lothl贸rien (chapter)
| next=Farewell to L贸rien
}}

'''The Mirror of Galadriel''' is the seventh chapter of the second book in ''[[The Fellowship of the Ring]]''.

==Summary==
[[Haldir]] led the [[Fellowship of the Ring|company]] to [[Caras Galadhon]]. Each member was greeted personally by [[Galadriel|Lady Galadriel]], who was lovely to behold. Her husband [[Celeborn|Lord Celeborn]] was very wise. The Lord and Lady were apprised of what the company had been doing until then and they were truly sorrowful when they heard of [[Gandalf]]'s fate.

The adventurers stayed for many days, resting and healing themselves as well as mourning Gandalf. One day Lady Galadriel showed [[Frodo Baggins|Frodo]] and [[Samwise Gamgee|Samwise]] her [[Mirror of Galadriel|mirror]], which was a basin of water from a nearby stream. Sam and Frodo saw scenes from the past and the future. When Sam looked into it, he saw that his home had been dug up and his father was alone; he wanted to go home. But the Mirror also showed him another possible future. Sam misinterpreted this scene as Frodo lying asleep on a cliff, but he really saw a time when he would be needed most. When Frodo looked into the mirror he sees a single eye which was searching for something. The [[The One Ring|Ring]] around his neck got heavier and heavier, but just as he was about to slip forward the Lady made the vision vanish.

Frodo offered his Ring to her when he realized that she wore [[Nenya|one]] of the [[Three Rings|three lesser rings]], but she told him that if she took it she would be corrupted, as would anyone else. She refused his offer and hoped that Frodo succeeds in his mission, though that would mean the discovery of the elves that she had managed to keep hidden from [[Sauron]] by use of her ring.

[[Category:The Fellowship of the Ring chapters|Mirror of Galadriel]]
[[fi:Galadrielin Peili (TSH)]]