{{disambig-more|The Return of the King|[[The Return of the King (disambiguation)]]}}
{{album
| image = The Lord of the Rings - The Return of the King - The Complete Recordings.jpg
| title=The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King - The Complete Recordings
| type=Soundtrack
| artist=[[Howard Shore]]
| released=[[20 November]], [[2007]]
| genre=
| length=229:17
| language=English
| label=[[Wikipedia:Reprise Records|Reprise Records]]
}}
'''''The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King - The Complete Recordings''''' is an album, by [[Howard Shore]], comprising the soundtrack from the [[The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King (extended edition)|extended edition]] of ''[[The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King]]''.

==Contents==
===Disc 1===
# [[Roots and Beginnings]] (6:31)
# [[Journey to the Crossroads|Journey to the Cross-roads]] (2:17)
# [[The Road to Isengard (soundtrack)|The Road to Isengard]] (2:18)
# [[The Foot of Orthanc]] (4:44)
# [[Return to Edoras (soundtrack)|Return to Edoras]] (1:51)
# [[The Chalice Passed]] (1:50)
# [[The Green Dragon (soundtrack)|The Green Dragon]] (feat. [[Billy Boyd]] & [[Dominic Monaghan]]) (0:34)
# [[Gollum's Villany]] (2:10)
# [[Eowyn's Dream|Éowyn's Dream]] (1:24)
# [[The Palantir (soundtrack)|The Palantír]] (3:10)
# [[Flight from Edoras]] (2:18)
# [[The Grace of Undómiel]] (feat. [[Renée Fleming]]) (6:21)
# [[The Eyes of the White Tower]] (4:33)
# [[A Coronal of Silver and Gold]] (8:26)
# [[The Lighting of the Beacons (soundtrack)|The Lighting of the Beacons]] (9:03)

===Disc 2===
# [[Osgiliath Invaded (soundtrack)|Osgiliath Invaded]] (feat. Ben Del Maestro) (8:47)
# [[The Stairs of Cirith Ungol (soundtrack)|The Stairs of Cirith Ungol]] (2:40)
# [[Allegiance to Denethor (soundtrack)|Allegiance to Denethor]] (3:19)
# [[The Sacrifice of Faramir (soundtrack)|The Sacrifice of Faramir]] (feat. "The Edge of Night," performed by Billy Boyd) (4:08)
# [[The Parting of Sam and Frodo (soundtrack)|The Parting of Sam and Frodo]] (4:04)
# [[Marshalling at Dunharrow (soundtrack)|Marshalling at Dunharrow]] (4:56)
# [[Anduril-Flame of the West|Andúril - Flame of the West]] (3:27)
# [[The Passing of the Grey Company (soundtrack)|The Passing of the Grey Company]] (4:12)
# [[Dwimorberg- The Haunted Mountain]] (2:26)
# [[Master Meriadoc, Swordthain]] (1:39)
# [[The Paths of the Dead (soundtrack)|The Paths of the Dead]] (6:22)
# [[The Siege of Gondor (soundtrack)|The Siege of Gondor]] (9:01)
# [[Shelob's Lair (soundtrack)#tabber-Complete Recordings|Shelob's Lair]] (8:53)
# [[Merry's Simple Courage (soundtrack)|Merry's Simple Courage]] (2:08)

===Disc 3===
# [[Grond - The Hammer of the Underworld (soundtrack)|Grond - The Hammer of the Underworld]] (1:32)
# [[Shelob the Great]] (5:12)
# [[The Tomb of the Stewards]] (3:58)
# [[The Battle of Pelennor Fields (soundtrack)|The Battle of the Pelennor Fields]] (4:10)
# [[The Pyre of Denethor (soundtrack)|The Pyre of Denethor]] (2:59)
# [[The Mumakil|The Mûmakil]] (0:57)
# [[Dernhelm in Battle]] (2:06)
# [["A Far Green Country" (soundtrack)|"A Far Green Country"]] (1:27)
# [[Shieldmaiden of Rohan (soundtrack)|Shieldmaiden of Rohan]] (5:07)
# [[The Passing of Theoden|The Passing of Théoden]] (2:16)
# [[The Houses of Healing (soundtrack)|The Houses of Healing]] (feat. [[Liv Tyler]]) (2:58)
# [[The Tower of Cirith Ungol (soundtrack)|The Tower of Cirith Ungol]] (4:41)
# [[The Last Debate (soundtrack)|The Last Debate]] (feat. Asëa Aranion," performed by Sissel) (4:21)
# [[The Land of Shadow (soundtrack)|The Land of Shadow]] (6:29)
# [[The Mouth of Sauron (soundtrack)|The Mouth of Sauron]] (feat. Sir James Galway) (8:15)
# [["For Frodo"]] (feat. Ben Del Maestro) (3:16)

===Disc 4===
# [[Mount Doom (soundtrack)|Mount Doom]] (feat. Renée Fleming) (4:09)
# [[The Crack of Doom (soundtrack)|The Crack of Doom]] (4:01)
# [[The Eagles]] (feat. Renée Fleming) (2:23)
# [[The Fellowship Reunited (soundtrack)|The Fellowship Reunited]] (feat. Sir James Galway, [[Viggo Mortensen]] and Renée Fleming) (12:18)
# [[The Journey to the Grey Havens]] (feat. Sir James Galway) (7:34)
# [[Elanor (soundtrack)|Elanor]] (feat. Sir James Galway) (1:27)
# [[Days of the Ring]] (feat. "[[Into the West]]," performed by [[Annie Lennox]]) (11:09)
# [[Bilbo's Song]] (2:57)

===Disc 5===
# Entire Score [DVD]

==See also==
*[[:Category:The Lord of the Rings: The Motion Picture Trilogy Original Soundtracks|''The Lord of the Rings: The Motion Picture Trilogy'' - Original Soundtracks]]:
**''[[The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring - Original Motion Picture Soundtrack|The Fellowship of the Ring]]''
**''[[The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers - Original Motion Picture Soundtrack|The Two Towers]]''
**''[[The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King - Original Motion Picture Soundtrack|The Return of the King]]''
*[[:Category:The Lord of the Rings: The Motion Picture Trilogy The Complete Recordings|''The Lord of the Rings: The Motion Picture Trilogy'' - The Complete Recordings]]:
**''[[The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring - The Complete Recordings|The Fellowship of the Ring]]''
**''[[The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers - The Complete Recordings|The Two Towers]]''

==External links==
* [http://www.lordoftherings-soundtrack.com/ Official Soundtrack Website]
** [http://www.lordoftherings-soundtrack.com/ ''The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King - The Complete Recordings'']
* [http://www.amagpiesnest.com/cd_editions/ROTK/ROTKcr.htm ''The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King - The Complete Recordings''] on [http://www.amagpiesnest.com/ A Magpie's Nest]

{{lordoftheringsfilms}}
{{title|italics}}
[[Category:The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King - The Complete Recordings| ]]