{{disambig-more|Battle of Five Armies|[[Battle of Five Armies (disambiguation)]]}}
{{board game infobox
| image = The Battle of Five Armies (1984 board game).jpg
| name=The Battle of Five Armies
| designer=Richard H. Britton, [[Coleman Charlton]], and John Crowll
| publisher=[[Iron Crown Enterprises]]
| releasedate=[[1984]]
| players=2
| ages=13+
| ice=7200
| isbn=0-425-07811-6
}}
'''''The Battle of Five Armies''''' is a [[1984]] board game based on the [[Battle of Five Armies]].

== Front Cover Text ==

The game of the epic struggle of Elves, Dwarves & Men versus Goblins & Wolves from the final chapters of J.R.R. Tolkien's THE HOBBIT.

== Back Cover Text ==

This action packed game simulates the epic struggle from the final chapters of THE HOBBIT. Elves, Men, Dwarves and Great Eagles do battle with Orcs, Wolves and Wargs for control of Lonely Mountain and the vast treasure. As the Free Peoples player you control the hastily allied armies defending the mountain spurs and the Front Gate, entrance to the ancient Dwarven Kingdom. Your numbers are few but among them are some of the best warriors known to Middle-earth. As the Dark Player you command Bolg of the North and his vast host. The weight of numbers is with you as is the element of surprise. The second wave of goblins comes scrambling over Mount Erebor itself. Who will win dominion over the mountain in THE BATTLE OF FIVE ARMIES?

This game is played by 2 people across a beautiful full-color map of the mountain spurs and battle plain between. The object is to win the day by gaining control of key areas.

A set of Basic Rules provide the simplicity and guidance necessary for beginning players. The Standard Rules provide a complete, fast paced game for experienced gamers as well as beginners who have mastered the Basic Game. Finally, the optional rules add complexity to the Standard Game while increasing the flavor and "realism" of the simulation.

This game contains:
*An 18"x24" full-color map of the mountain spurs and battle ground between
*156 full-color double-sided dicecut counters
*Rulesbook, a charts and tables sheet and one die

THE BATTLE OF FIVE ARMIES
*Suitable for ages 13 and up
*Playing time 2–4 hours
*Complexity rating (on a scale of 1 to 10):
**Basic Game.....3
**Standard Game.....4
==External links==
*[http://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/2775/the-battle-of-five-armies The Battle of Five Armies] at [http://boardgamegeek.com/ BoardGameGeek]
{{DEFAULTSORT:Battle of Five Armies (1984 board game)}}
{{title|italics}}
[[Category:Board games]]