{{scene
|name=The Spoiling of Isengard
|film=[[The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring]]
| image = The Lord of the Rings (film series) - Saruman using Palantír.jpg
|number= 18 (extended edition)<br>
         14 (theatrical cut)
|duration = 1:42
|event=[[Saruman]] begins the process of creating his own army.
|characters=[[Saruman]], [[Sauron]], [[Gandalf]]
|previous=[[The Midgewater Marshes]]
|next=[[A Knife in the Dark (scene)|A Knife in the Dark]]
}}
'''The Spoiling of Isengard''' is the fourteenth scene of ''[[The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring]]'' and the eighteenth scene of [[The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring (extended edition)|''The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring'' (extended edition)]]. 

==Synopsis==
At [[Isengard]], Saruman looks into his [[palantír]] to converse with Sauron. Sauron instructs him to begin construction on an army "worthy of [[Mordor]]". Summoning a few [[Orcs]] that he has already created, Saruman tells them that they have work to do. 

Gandalf is lying on the tower of [[Orthanc]], imprisoned while Saruman's orcs begin to convert Isengard into a massive factory. Trees are felled around the tower while Saruman looks on. Isengard begins to equip for war.

==Differences==
*Isengard has already begun conversion to a factory when Gandalf arrives in the books.
*The conversation between Sauron and Saruman is an invention for the movies, but they do indeed converse "off-screen" in the books.
*Saruman is more loyal to Sauron than in the books. At this point he would have already started working on his own agenda, but in the movies he is more or less subservient to Sauron, minus a few comments which might suggest otherwise.

[[Category:The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring scenes|18]]