{{book
|title=The Atlas of Middle-Earth
| image = The Atlas of Middle-earth.jpg
|author=[[Karen Wynn Fonstad]]
|publisher=[[Houghton Mifflin]]
|date=[[29 May]] [[1981]]<br/>1991 (revised edition)
|format=Paperback
|pages=210
|noisbn=0395286654 (1981 first edition)
0395535166 (1991 revised edition)
0618126996 (2001 reprint, pictured)
}}

'''''The Atlas of Middle-earth''''' by [[Karen Wynn Fonstad]] is an atlas of various lands in [[Arda]]. It includes specific maps for ''[[The Silmarillion]]'', ''[[The Lord of the Rings]]'' and ''[[The Hobbit]]'', for which it is intended as a reading companion.

==Contents==
The maps are treated as if they are of real landscapes, and are drawn according to the same rules that a real atlas is drawn: for each area the history of the land is taken into account, as well as geography on a larger scale and from there maps are drawn. Discussion includes suggestions as to the geology that could explain various formations, and points that are contradictory between multiple accounts.

City maps and floor plans for important buildings are also included; these are very often useful for making sense of the narratives, especially in ''[[The Lord of the Rings]]''.  As well, many battles such as [[Battles of Beleriand|those]] of [[Beleriand]], the [[Last Alliance]] and the [[War of the Ring]] are illustrated.

The book was published in [[1981]], but in [[1991]] a revised and updated version was published, which took information from ''[[The History of Middle-earth]]'' into account. In [[2001]], the publishers issued a reprint of the 1991 revised edition with a new cover (pictured) but identical contents.

Fonstad also made a bold attempt to fill the gaps by using early conceptual work, mainly from ''[[The Book of Lost Tales Part One]]'' and the ''[[Ambarkanta]]'', combining the later known maps with the sketches used by Tolkien to provide "world maps" of [[Arda]] in its entirety and show [[Aman]], [[Beleriand]]'s position relative to [[Eriador]], and the place of [[Númenor]] in the Sea.

It was, however, published before the final three volumes of ''[[The History of Middle-earth]]'', and thus some maps are based on [[J.R.R. Tolkien|Tolkien]]'s early works, which were revised in later writings.

==Errors and criticism==
Despite being a thoroughly researched and well-respected reference book, the ''Atlas'' is known to contain several errors. However, a number of these were corrected in the revised edition, as noted below.

===Inconsistencies with earlier publications===
*Page 13: Nogrod is shown north of Belegost, and both south of Mount Dolmed. ''[[The Silmarillion]]'' states that Belegost was "to the north of the great height of Mount Dolmed" and that Nogrod was the more southerly of the two.<ref>{{S|10}}</ref>
*Pages 39 and 88: On both pages, [[Drúwaith Iaur]] is shown north of the [[Ered Nimrais]] and south of the [[Angren]], and on page 39 extending east below the [[Adorn]]. In the Unfinished Tales map, Drúwaith Iaur is in the narrow area between the ocean and the southern Ered Nimrais, south of the mouth of the [[Angren]].<ref>{{UT|Index}}, "Map"</ref>
*Page 71: [[Hardbottle]] is shown in the [[Southfarthing]] rather than the [[Northfarthing]].<ref name="Nomen">{{HM|N}}, p. 771</ref> Sackville, shown in the Southfarthing, is entirely invented (compare the [[Sackville Family]]).
*Page 89: [[Tarnost]] is shown as a city separate from [[Ethring]] though it may be a discarded name for the latter from early drafts.<ref>{{HM|AoL}}, p. 139</ref>
*Pages 92 and 93: [[Lithlad]] is shown in the south of [[Mordor]] rather than the northeast.
*Page 99: It is written that Bilbo gave the Arkenstone to the Elvenking and Bard on 22 November, then Dáin arrived in the early morning on 23 November.  In ''The Hobbit'', [[Bilbo Baggins|Bilbo]] gave away the [[Arkenstone]] and then returned before midnight to wake up Bombur.<ref>{{H|Thief}}</ref> The next day, there was a new parley, it was revealed that the Elves and Men had the Arkenstone, and [[Thorin]] expelled Bilbo from the [[Lonely Mountain]]. On the ''next'' morning, Dáin arrived.<ref name="Burst">{{H|Burst}}</ref> Fonstad's timeline has Dáin arrive in one day, while the text of ''The Hobbit'' has him arrive in two days. Either Dáin must have arrived on 24 November or Bilbo must have handed over the Arkenstone late on 21 November.
*Page 106: In ''The Hobbit'', when the Dwarves saw a fire off in the woods, "The light was ahead of them and to the ''left'' of the path".<ref>{{H|Flies}}</ref> In Fonstad's map, the Dwarves left the path to the right. ''(Corrected in 2nd edition.)''
*Page 125: [[Combe]] is shown laying to the northwest of [[Staddle]] on the east side of the [[Bree-hill]], while in fact Combe should lie a little east of Staddle's location.<ref>{{FR|Sign}}</ref>

===Inconsistencies with later publications===
Both the first and second editions of the ''Atlas'' were written before the final three volumes of [[The History of Middle-earth]] were published, so at certain points it is contradicted by this later material. [[The Letters of J.R.R. Tolkien]], which was published between the first and second editions of the ''Atlas'', is not taken into account in the revision.
*Page viii: [[Middle-earth]] dominates much of the northern hemisphere of [[Arda]] [[Changing of the World|made round]], with [[Forochel]] being high in the polar regions of the world and [[Umbar]] laying more than halfway southward between the northern pole and the [[Girdle of Arda|equator]].
**In [[Letter 294]], Tolkien confirms that [[Hobbiton]] is intended to be at the latitude of [[wikipedia:Oxford|Oxford]], with [[Minas Tirith]] 600 miles south being near to the latitude of [[wikipedia:Florence|Florence]]. With this information, it is clear that Middle-earth would be hardly as large as it appears on the ''Atlas'' map of a round Arda.
*Pages 4 and 5: The [[Sea of Helcar]] is seen to cover the area of future [[Mordor]], [[Khand]], and [[Rhûn]], and the [[Sea of Rhûn]] and [[Sea of Núrnen]] are shown as its remnants.
**In ''[[The Peoples of Middle-earth]]'', there are references to the Sea of Rhûn existing in the [[First Age]], as well as the forest to its northeast and the hills to its southwest, indicating that it must be separate from the Sea of Helcar.
*Pages 38 and 39: The western shores of [[Lindon]] and the [[Ethir Anduin]] are shown to exist in the [[Second Age]] of the world as they did in the [[Third Age]].
**''The Peoples of Middle-earth'' tells that during the [[Akallabêth|Downfall of Númenor]], Lindon lost much land to the advancing shores, while the eastern and southern portions of the [[Bay of Belfalas]] retreated back, putting the city of [[Pelargir]], which had been only a few miles from the coast, much farther inland.
* The [[Little Lune]] river appears on many maps but is never labeled, because its name was first published in ''[[The Peoples of Middle-earth]]''.<ref>{{PM|Atani}} p.313</ref>

===Internal inconsistencies===
*Pages 12 and 53: [[Dorthonion]] and [[Himring]] are slightly above parallel J, but [[Tol Fuin]] and [[Himling]] are shown further north, above parallel I<ref>[[Didier Willis]], "On assembling maps from Beleriand to Rhûn", in ''On Cartography, maps & locations in Middle-earth – Selected essays'', ed. D. Willis, Le Dragon de Brume, 2024, p.108-109</ref>. This is not just a coordinate error, as the entire geography of the atlas is affected by this mistake.
*Pages 38 and 41: [[Belegost]] has been moved 150 miles further south than previously shown to the middle of the southern [[Blue Mountains]].
*Pages 53, 76, and 80: On page 53, [[Rhosgobel]] is located near the border of [[Mirkwood]] well ''south'' of the [[Old Forest Road]], due east of [[Moria]]. On pages 76 and 80, Rhosgobel is still at the edge of the forest, but ''north'' of the Old Forest Road.  One or the other location should have been used, not both.
**In ''[[The Fellowship of the Ring]]'', it is stated that in December of [[TA|TA3019]], scouts "had climbed the pass at the source of the [[Gladden River]], and had come down into  [[Rhovanion|Wilderland]] and over the [[Gladden Fields]] and so at length had reached the old home of [[Radagast]] at Rhosgobel", which supports the page 53 location.<ref>{{FR|II3}}</ref>  
**In ''[[Unfinished Tales]]'', [[Christopher Tolkien]] states that Rhosgobel was "in the forest borders between the [[Carrock]] and the Old Forest Road".<ref>{{UT|Istari}}, Note 4</ref>
*Pages 89 and 210: In the map on p.&nbsp;89, [[Tarnost]] is located in Q-34, but the "Index of Selected Place Names" on p.&nbsp;210 places it at R-35.
*Pages 97 and 200: In the text of p.&nbsp;97, Fonstad refers to the book ''[[Journeys of Frodo]]'' by Barbara Strachey, but there is no reference to this work in "Selected References" on pp.&nbsp;200–201.
*Page 144: In the upper-right inset, the cleft of the brazen gate (which appears in the upper-left inset) is not depicted.
*Pages 205 and 209: The index entry "Grey Mountains" is a mix of references to the "[[Grey Mountains]]" (or Ered Mithrin, located at coordinates I-35) and the "[[Grey Mountains (ancient)|Grey Mountains (of the South)]]" (located at coordinates V/Zh-30). Additionally, the index entry "[[Grey Mountains (ancient)|Grey Mountains (of the South)]]" is incomplete. A more complete and accurate list of maps on which each set of Grey Mountains appear and are labeled is as follows (they appear unlabeled on many more):
**Northern: pp.&nbsp;53, 65, 76, 80 
**Southern: pp.&nbsp;2, 4, 38

===Typographical errors===
*Page 2: [[Mountains of the Wind|Mts. of the Wind]] is written as "Mts. of the World".
*Page 2: [[Sea of Ringil]] is written as "Sea of Ringol".
*Page 7: [[Ezellohar]] is written as "Ezollahar". [[Ilmarin]] is written as "Ilmaren". [[Tol Eressëa|Eressëa]] is written as "Erresëa". [[Hyarmentir]] is written as "Hyamentir".
*Pages 6 and 38: [[Avallónë]] is written as "Avalónnë" and "Avalonnë", respectively.
*Pages 7 and 38: [[Alqualondë]] is written as "Aqualondë" and "Aqualóndë", respectively.
*Page 13: [[Gabilgathol]] is written as "Gabilgathod".
*Page 53: [[Caras Galadhon]] is written as "Caras Galadon".
*Page 58 : River [[Lhûn|Lune]] is written "River Lûne".
*Page 71: [[Tuckborough]] is written as "Tuckburrow".
*Page 113: [[Bolg]] is written as "Borg".<ref name="Burst"/> ''(Corrected in 2nd edition.)''
*Page 135: [[Methedras]] is written as "Mathedras".
*Page 139: "[[Fen Hollen]]" is written "Fen Hollin".
*Page 148: [[Gamling|Gamling the Old]] is written as "Gambling the Old".
*Pages 189 and 190: [[Khuzdul]], the language of the [[Dwarves]], is labeled as "[[Khazâd]]".
*Page 204, index : "[[Eryn Vorn]]" is written "Eryn Vron".
*Page 204, index : "[[Annon-In-Gelydh]]" is written "Annon-In-Gadydh", at the entry "Gate of the Noldor".
*Page 205, index : "[[Glǽmscrafu]]" is written "Glumscrafu".
*Page 205, index : "[[Haerast]]" is written "Haerest".
*Page 207, index : the pages refering to [[Ringlo]] ("12, 21") are the same than [[Ringwil]], and therefore are incorrect.
*Page 208, index : "[[Southfarthing]]" is written "Sourth Farthing".
*Page 209, index : "Eredhithui", an earlier name of the [[Misty Mountains]], is written "Ered Hithui".
*Page 210, index : "Entish Dale" is written "Entish Dle", at the entry "[[Ettenmoors|Hoardale]]".
*Page 210, index : "[[Murmuran]]", the house of Lórien in Valinor, is written "Mumuran".
*Page 210, index : "[[Noman-lands|Uvanwaith]]" is written "Ovanwaith" and therefore misplaced in the index.

===Use of early sources===
Fonstad uses early names from the ''[[The Book of Lost Tales Part One|Book of Lost Tales]]'' era of Tolkien's development of the [[legendarium]] for some locations, particularly in [[Aman]] and [[Tol Eressëa]].

In [[Aman]], Fonstad identifies the place where [[Mandos]] delivered the [[Doom of the Noldor]] with the early name "[[Hanstovánen]]" rather than [[Araman]]. She also describes various dwellings of the [[Valar]] in [[Valinor]]. In the Second Age map of [[Tol Eressëa]], she uses the early names [[Tavrobel]] and [[Kortirion]], rather than the later names "Tathrobel" and "Cortirion" for the same places.<ref>{{LR|Quenta}}</ref> In the map of [[Gondolin]], she identifies several landmarks that are only said to exist in the earliest works.

Incorporation of these names and places on equal footing with those from later in the legendarium's evolution is questionable, but Fonstad seems to have been aware of the potential issues and explicitly notes in the accompanying text the speculative nature of the maps of the Undying Lands.

===="Dor Daidelos"====
One clear error relating to use of early materials appears on the maps of the far north of Beleriand in the First Age printed on pages 4, 5, and 15. In the ''Atlas'', the lands at the foot of [[Thangorodrim]] are labeled "[[Dor Daedeloth]] (Land of Shadow Horror)" on various maps, while the wide region north of the [[Ered Engrin]] is labeled "Dor Daidelos (Region of Everlasting Cold)" (the p.&nbsp;15 map uses "Regions" plural). 

However, the published ''Silmarillion'' uses "Dor Daedeloth" (Land of the Shadow of Horror) as the name for the northern lands under the control of Morgoth without distinguishing the regions north and south of the mountains.<ref>{{S|Index}}, entry "Dor Daedeloth"</ref> The name "Daidelos" for the lands north of the Ered Engrin was used only on Ambarkanta Map V; in other draft material this was changed or corrected variously to "Dor-na-Dhaideloth ('Sky-roof')," "Daideloth ('High plain')," "Dor-Daidelos," "Dor-Daedeloth," and, ultimately, "Dor Daedeloth" as it appears in the published ''Silmarillion''.<ref>{{SM|Index}}, entry "Dor-Daideloth"</ref> It seems clear from this documented evolutionary process that Tolkien intended "Dor Daedeloth" to be equivalent to, and a replacement of, the earlier term "Daidelos," not for the two to be separate coexisting regions. 

As such, the label "Dor Daidelos" is in error in three ways: First, the lands north of the Ered Engrin should share the name "Dor Daedeloth" with the lands in the shadow of Thangorodrim to the south. Second, the spelling "Dor Daidelos," unhyphenated, never appears in any primary source material. Third, the translation "Region(s) of Everlasting Cold" is entirely unattested and appears to be Fonstad's own invention.

== Translated editions ==
* ''Atlas de la Tierra Media'' (Spanish), editor Timun Mas Narrativa, 1993.
* ''L'atlante della Terra-di-mezzo di Tolkien'' (Italian), editor Rusconi Libri, 1997, translated by Isabella Murro.
* ''Atlas Středozemě'' (Czech), editor Mladá fronta, 1998, translated by Stanislava Pošustová-Menšíková.
* ''Historischer Atlas von Mittelerde'' (German), editor Klett-Cotta, translated by Hans J. Schütz. The first german edition was published in 2001.
* ''Atlas Śródziemia'' (Polish), editor Wydawnictwo Amber, 2016, translated by Tadeusz Andrzej Olszański.
* ''Középfölde atlasza'' (Hungarian), editor Cicero, 2017, translated by Gabriella Buki, Tamás Füzessy, and Balázs Tallian.
* ''O Atlas da Terra-média'' (Portuguese), HarperCollins Brasil, 2022, translated by Cristina Casagrande.
* ''L'Atlas de la Terre du Milieu'' (French), Bragelonne, 2022, translated by Daniel Lauzon. All the maps were redrawn by the freelance illustrator Stéphane Arson in a similar style than Fonstad but modernized.
* A Japanese edition was published in 2002.

== External links ==
* [https://www.isfdb.org/cgi-bin/title.cgi?913898 List] of English-language versions of the first edition
* [https://www.isfdb.org/cgi-bin/title.cgi?468211 List] of English-language versions of the revised edition
* [https://www.tolkiendil.com/tolkien/sur-tolkien/karen_wynn_fonstad_-_atlas_terre_du_milieu Webpage] about the ''Atlas'' on Tolkiendil.com (French language)
* [https://www.tolkiendil.com/tolkien/sur-tolkien/critiques/atlas_fonstad_premiere_edition Webpage] on the first edition on Tolkiendil.com (French language)

{{References}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:Atlas of Middle-earth, The}}
{{title|italics}}
[[Category:Map books]]
[[Category:Publications by title]]