{{band
| image = Tolkien Ensemble (with Christopher Lee).jpg
| name=Tolkien Ensemble
| origin=Denmark
| genre=Classical, Folk
| years=1995-2013
| label=ClassicO, Membran, Decca
| website=[http://tolkien-ensemble.net tolkien-ensemble.net]
| members=[[Caspar Reiff]], Peter Hall, Signe Asmussen, Øyvind Ougaard, Katja Nielsen, Morten Ryelund Sørensen
| formermembers=[[Christopher Lee]]
}}
The '''Tolkien Ensemble''' is a Danish ensemble with the aim to create "the world's first complete musical interpretation of the poems and songs from [[The Lord of the Rings]]". They published four studio albums from 1997 to 2005. The project was given approval by both the [[Tolkien Estate|Tolkien family]] and [[Harper Collins]] Publishers. Queen [[Margrethe II of Denmark]] gave permission for her illustrations to be used as cover art for their albums.

The ensemble was founded by guitarist and composer [[Caspar Reiff]] in 1995. Other permanent members were Peter Hall, Signe Asmussen, Øyvind Ougaard, Katja Nielsen, and Morten Ryelund Sørensen.

According to their [https://www.facebook.com/thetolkienensemble/ Facebook page], the ensemble continued to perform sporadically until Covid-19 lockdowns prevented further concerts.

==Discography==
*[[An Evening in Rivendell]] ([[1997]])
*:''Malene Nordtorp, Ole Jegindø Norup, Mads Thiemann, Morten Ernst Lassen, Commotio-Kvartetten choir, Polkageist.''
*[[A Night in Rivendell]] ([[2000]])
*:''Ulrik Cold, Kurt Ravn, Povl Dissing, Mads Thiemann, Morten Ernst Lassen, The Chamber Choir Hymnia.''
*[[At Dawn in Rivendell]] ([[2003]])
*:''Kurt Ravn, Morten Ernst Lassen, Peter Hall, Tom McEwan, Caspar Reiff, the Copenhagen Chamber Choir Camerata, Copenhagen Young Strings. Recitation by [[Christopher Lee]].''
*[[Leaving Rivendell]]: Selected songs and poems from the Lord of the Rings ([[2005]])
*:''Jørgen Ditlevsen, Kurt Ravn,  Nick Keir, the Danish National Chamber Choir/DR, the Danish Radio Sinfonietta/DR. Recitation by Christopher Lee.''
*[[Complete Songs and Poems]] ([[2006]])
*:''A compilation of all of the previous albums.''
*[[The Best of The Tolkien Ensemble]] ([[2008]])
*:''A compilation containing fourteen previously released tracks and four new live tracks.''

==External links==
'''[http://www.tolkien-ensemble.net/ Official Website]'''

[[Category:Bands]]
[[Category:Classical music]]
[[Category:Folk music]]

[[de:Tolkien Ensemble]]