
{{company infobox
| name=
| image = JRRT.jpeg
| founded=[[1996]]<ref>{{webcite|author=Raphaëlle Rérolle|articleurl=https://www.lemonde.fr/culture/article/2012/07/05/tolkien-l-anneau-de-la-discorde_1729858_3246.html|articlename=Tolkien, The Ring of Discord|website=[https://www.lemonde.fr/ Le Monde]|accessed=2025}}</ref>
| founder=[[Christopher Tolkien]]
| location=[[Oxford]]
| type=Legal organisation
| keypeople=[[Christopher Tolkien]]<br/>[[Priscilla Tolkien]]<br/>[[Baillie Tolkien]]<br/>[[Michael George Tolkien]]
| members=
| subsidiaries=
| products=
| parent=
| owner=
| precededby=
| succeededby=
| website=[http://www.tolkienestate.com/ www.tolkienestate.com]
}}
The '''Tolkien Estate''' is the legal body which manages the copyrights of most of [[J.R.R. Tolkien]]'s works. It mainly holds the copyright over the literary texts. [[Christopher Tolkien]] and his sister, [[Priscilla Tolkien]], were executors. Current executors of the estate include Christopher's second wife [[Baillie Tolkien]] and Christopher's nephew [[Michael George Tolkien]]. Cathleen Blackburn of Manches & Co. has been the estate's solicitor for many years.

The film and merchandise rights for ''[[The Lord of the Rings]]'' and ''[[The Hobbit]]'' were sold by J.R.R. Tolkien, and are currently owned by [[Middle-earth Enterprises]], formerly known as Tolkien Enterprises, a company currently controlled by [[Embracer Group]], while the television rights of these two books remained with Tolkien Estate.

On [[13 November]] [[2017]], it was announced that [[Amazon Studios]] had acquired the television rights of ''The Lord of the Rings'' and ''The Hobbit'', committing to a [[The Lord of the Rings: The Rings of Power|multi-season television series]]. The series is not a direct adaptation of both of these novels, but instead it features stories that are set before the events of ''The Lord of the Rings''.<ref>{{webcite|author=Samuel Axon|articleurl=http://arstechnica.com/gaming/2017/11/amazon-will-run-a-multi-season-lord-of-the-rings-prequel-tv-series/|articlename=
Amazon will run a multi-season Lord of the Rings prequel TV series
|dated=13 November 2017|website=[http://arstechnica.com arstechnica]|accessed=22 March 2021}}</ref> [[Amazon.com Incorporated|Amazon]] said that the deal included the potential production for a spin-off series as well.<ref>{{webcite|author=Sandra Gonzalez,|articleurl=http://edition.cnn.com/2017/11/13//entertainment/lord-of-the-rings-tv-series-amazon/index.html|articlename=
Amazon announces 'Lord of the Rings' TV show
|dated=14 November 2017|website=[http://edition.cnn.com CNN Edition]|accessed=22 March 2021}}</ref> The press release referred to "previously unexplored stories based on J.R.R. Tolkien’s original writings". Amazon is the producer in conjunction with the Tolkien Estate itself, [[The Tolkien Trust]], [[HarperCollins]] and [[New Line Cinema]].<ref>{{webcite|articleurl=http://www.nytimes.com/2017/11/13/arts/television/lord-of-the-rings-series-amazon.html|articlename=‘Lord of the Rings’ Series Coming to Amazon|website=[https://www.nytimes.com/ New York Times]|accessed=13 November 2017}}</ref>

==See also==
* [[Lawsuits]]
* [[Licensing]]

{{references}}

==External links==
* '''[http://www.tolkienestate.com Official Website]'''
* {{WP|Tolkien Estate|Tolkien Estate}}

[[Category:British organizations]]
[[Category:Organizations (real-world)]]
[[de:Tolkien Estate]]
[[fi:Tolkien Estate]]