{{Disambig-more|Treebeard|[[Treebeard (disambiguation)]]}}{{chapter
| image=Ted Nasmith - Treebeard and the Entmoot.jpg
| caption= "Treebeard and the Entmoot" by [[Ted Nasmith]]
| title=Treebeard
| book=The Two Towers
| number=4
| event=[[Peregrin Took|Peregrin]] and [[Meriadoc Brandybuck|Merry]] meet [[Treebeard]]; [[Entmoot]] begins.
| date=[[29 February|29]]-[[30 February]] {{TA|3019|n}}
| location=[[Fangorn Forest]]
| previous=The Uruk-hai
| next=The White Rider
}}


'''Treebeard''' is the fourth chapter of the first book in ''[[The Two Towers]]''.

==Summary==
The [[Hobbits]] ran as fast as they could into the forest, finally stopping for a drink of water. They came upon a sort of rock wall and climbed up natural stairs, where they meet an [[Ents|Ent]], or [[Treebeard]], as he called himself. Treebeard was the oldest living creature in [[Middle-earth]], a fourteen-foot guardian of [[Fangorn Forest]]. He took the Hobbits to an Ent house and gave them drink and shelter. He knew [[Gandalf]] and asked the Hobbits for news of the outside world. When he came to know about [[Saruman]] and how he had tamed [[Orcs]] to serve him, he was angry. He decided to gather all the Ents and march to [[Isengard]]. Treebeard told the Hobbits that there weren't many Ents left because all the [[Entmaidens]] and [[Entwives]] had gone away and the Ents could not find them. Due to no new [[Entings]] being born and the Ents growing old, the population was dwindling.

The next day Treebeard took the Hobbits to a meeting of ents at [[Entmoot]]. Two dozen Ents were gathered and more came. The next day they marched to Isengard. The ents were angry at Saruman, their neighbor, who cut down their trees and burned them without reason and who also trained Orcs not to be afraid of Fangorn. Pippin looked behind and saw the whole forest moving. The trees had awakened and were marching towards [[Nan Curunír]], the valley of Saruman.
==Composition==
The chapter was probably completed around [[31 January]] [[1942]].<ref>{{CG|CG}}, p. xxiv</ref>
{{references}}
{{title}}
[[Category:The Two Towers chapters]]