{{disambig-two|the event|chapter of [[The Silmarillion]]|[[Of Fëanor and the Unchaining of Melkor]]}}
{{events
| event=Unchaining of Melkor
| location=[[Máhanaxar]], [[Valinor]]
| date={{YT|1400}}
| result=Melkor pardoned, allowed limited freedom within [[Valmar]]
| partof=[[Noontide of Valinor]]
| participants=[[Melkor]], [[Manwë]], [[Nienna]], [[Mandos]], other [[Valar]]
}}
The '''Unchaining of Melkor''' refers to the release of [[Melkor]] following his [[Chaining of Melkor|decreed term of bondage]] in the [[Halls of Mandos]].

==Background==
Following the [[Awakening of the Elves]], the [[Valar]] sought to reclaim [[Middle-earth]] from Melkor who had been dominant since his overthrow of the [[Two Lamps]]. After a [[Battle of the Powers|lengthy war]], the Valar were triumphant and Melkor, bound by the great chain [[Angainor]], was cast into prison within the Halls of Mandos, doomed to abide for three ages before he should be tried anew.

During Melkor's bondage the [[Eldar]] completed their [[Great Journey]] to [[Aman]] where they established [[Eldamar|their realms]].

==Trial and release of Melkor==
In {{YT|1400}} Melkor completed his decreed term of bondage in the Halls of Mandos and, as [[Manwë]] had promised, was brought before the [[Máhanaxar|thrones of the Valar]] to be tried.<ref>{{AA|87}}</ref>

Melkor looked upon the glory of [[Valinor]] with envy, the Eldar that sat at the feet of the Valar with hatred, and at the wealth of bright gems with lust; but he kept his malice hidden. He instead abased himself at the feet of Manwë, suing for pardon, and vowed to help aid the Valar and assist in healing the hurts he had caused. Several of the Valar were against his release, but his prayer was aided by [[Nienna]], while [[Mandos]] was silent, and Manwë ultimately granted him pardon.<ref name="sil6">{{S|6}}</ref>

The Valar, however, did not immediately allow him to depart beyond their sight and vigilance within [[Valmar]]. Melkor was therefore given a humble dwelling within the city, and not permitted to go more than one league from Valmar unless by the leave of Manwë and with a guardian at his side.<ref name="mr_silmaril">{{MR|P3I6}}</ref> 

Melkor became both in form and seeming as the other Valar, with his words and deeds being fair, and both the Valar and the Eldar had profit from his aid and counsel. Therefore, in {{YT|1410|n}}, Manwë permitted him to go freely about the land, believing that Melkor was abiding by his oaths and that his evil was cured. [[Ulmo]] was not deceived however, and his heart misgave Melkor; likewise, the mirth of [[Tulkas]] was clouded whenever Melkor passed by, and the nails of his fingers bit into his palms for the restraint that he put upon himself.<ref>{{AA|89}}</ref>

==Other versions of the legendarium==
In earlier versions, such as ''[[The Earliest 'Silmarillion']]'' and ''[[The Quenta]]'', Melkor spent "seven ages in the prisons of Mandos in gradually lightened pain" before being brought before the conclave of the Gods for trial.<ref name=sketch>{{SM|2}}</ref><ref name=quenta4>{{SM|Q4}}</ref>

In ''[[The Earliest Annals of Valinor]]'', Melkor was released in [[Valian Year]] 2900, against the wishes off both Tulkas and Aulë.<ref>{{SM|V2900}}</ref> In ''[[The Later Annals of Valinor]]'', Melkor was released in V.Y. 2700, against the wishes of Tulkas, Aulë, and Oromë.<ref name=LAV>{{LR|AV}}</ref>

==Motivations of Manwë==
In the published ''[[Silmarillion]]'', Manwë's motivation in releasing Melkor is given as him quite simply not understanding evil:
{{quote|For Manwë was free from evil and could not comprehend it, and he knew that in the beginning, in the thought of Ilúvatar, Melkor had been even as he; and he saw not to the depths of Melkor’s heart, and did not perceive that all love had departed from him for ever.|{{S|6}}}}

In ''[[The Later Quenta Silmarillion]]'', this was somewhat expanded to include Manwë's further hope that a truly repentant Melkor would also be able to do more to undo the [[Arda Marred|marring of Arda]] than anything else:
{{quote|Therefore after a time Manwë gave him leave to go freely about the land. The evil that Melkor had wrought of old in wrath and malice was beyond full healing, but his aid, if he would truly give it, would do more than aught else to amend the world. For Melkor was in his beginning the greatest of the Powers, and Manwë believed that if he were repentant he would regain in great part his first might and wisdom. On this path he judged that Melkor was now set, and would persevere if he were treated without grudge. Jealousy and rancour Manwë was slow to perceive, for he knew them not in himself; and he did not understand that all love had departed from the mind of Melkor for ever.|{{MR|P3II5}}}}

In the ''[[Ósanwe-kenta]]'' the motivations of Manwë are covered in more depth and greatly enriched.

It is first explained that all minds, of [[Incarnate]] and [[Ainu]] alike, are naturally open, and that would be their normal state in [[Arda Unmarred]]; all beings also have the right to close their minds, creating a barrier of Unwill ("[[avanir]]") which cannot be penetrated. From this it is then explained that the mind of Manwë was ever open as his intent was to fulfill the will of [[Eru]], and he had nothing to conceal nor thought that it was harmful for any to know; in contrast, Melkor kept his thoughts hidden, as was his right. Thus, while Melkor was always aware of Manwë's will and of Manwë being bound by the commands of Eru, Manwë in turn was unable to know Melkor's true thoughts and purposes and had to believe Melkor's words until proved false.<ref name=osanwe>{{NM|P2ix}}</ref>

Second, Melkor was given a chance of mercy for repentance: not only for the hopeful healing of Arda, but for healing of ''Melkor himself'', who had the right to exist and use his powers. Manwë's office was to retain, or return, all subjects in allegiance to Eru; enslaving Melkor, or denying him his part, was authority and power reserved for Eru alone.<ref name=osanwe />

Third, holding Melkor could have caused much more destruction. Melkor's power at that time was still immense beyond calculation; if he came to believe that release was impossible, then in his despair he may have had a ruinous outburst.<ref name=osanwe />

Fourth, Melkor's release was in accordance with the promise made at the time of his sentence: if Manwë had broken this promise it would have been a step in the path of Melkor, and thus reduced Manwë from being the vice-regent of the One, to a proud king and rival of Melkor, striving with him for the throne.<ref name=osanwe />

And, ultimately, the outcome eventually achieved of victory in the First Age and the final overthrow of Melkor, may have had no other way to be brought about.<ref name=osanwe />

{{references}}
[[Category:Events]]