{{organization infobox
| name=Union of Maedhros
| image = Alan Lee - The Battle of Unnumbered Tears.jpg
| caption="The Battle of Unnumbered Tears" by [[Alan Lee]]
| pronun=
| othernames=
| founded={{FA|468}} 
| founder=[[Maedhros]]
| purpose=Unite the peoples of Beleriand against [[Morgoth]]
| members=[[Dwarves of Belegost]], [[Easterlings (First Age)|Easterlings]], [[Gondolindrim]], [[Elves of Mithrim]], [[Elves of Nargothrond]], [[Falathrim]], [[Haladin]], [[Men of Dor-lómin]], and [[Noldor|Noldor of Hithlum]]
| location=North Beleriand
| disbanded={{FA|472}}
| notablefor=Ended in the disaster known as the [[Nirnaeth Arnoediad]]
}}

The '''Union of Maedhros''' was a short-lived alliance formed by [[Maedhros]] after the [[Dagor Bragollach]]. It sought to unite the [[Fëanorians]] with the other peoples of [[Beleriand]], including the [[Noldor]] of [[Hithlum]], the [[Dwarves]], the [[Edain]] and the newly arrived [[Easterlings]]. Due to tensions with the [[sons of Fëanor]], [[Nargothrond]] and [[Doriath]] only sent small forces. The alliance was defeated at the [[Nirnaeth Arnoediad]], the Battle of Unnumbered Tears.<ref name="Fifth">{{S|Fifth}}</ref>

==Structure==
The Union of Maedhros was divided into two armies in the east and west, led by Maedhros and [[High King of the Noldor|High King]] [[Fingon]] respectively.

===Eastern army===
*Elves of [[Himring]] ([[Maedhros]])
*[[Easterlings (First Age)|Easterlings]] under the service of Maedhros ([[Bór]])
*Easterlings under the service of [[Caranthir]] ([[Ulfang]])
*[[Dwarves of Belegost]] ([[Azaghâl]])

===Western army===
*Noldor of [[Hithlum]] ([[Fingon]])
*[[Men of Dor-lómin]] ([[Húrin]])
*[[Haladin]] ([[Haldir (Chieftain of the Haladin)|Haldir]])
*[[Elves of Nargothrond|Elves]] of [[Nargothrond]] ([[Gwindor]])
*Some [[Falathrim]]
*[[Mablung]] and [[Beleg]] from [[Doriath]]<ref group="note" name="GA">In [[The Grey Annals]] (§221), Thingol also sends a small force of Grey-elves with Mablung.</ref>

==History==
After the [[Dagor Bragollach]], the [[Noldor]] had lost control over northern [[Beleriand]], and were mostly reduced to enclaves in [[Hithlum]] and [[Nargothrond]], including the hidden [[Gondolin]].<ref>{{S|Fingolfin}}</ref> When Maedhros heard of the heroic deeds of [[Beren]] and [[Lúthien]] new hope came to him. Maedhros decided to unite the peoples of [[Beleriand]] to assail [[Angband]].

Elves, Men and Dwarves joined the alliance. The [[Dwarves]] of the [[Blue Mountains]] supplied both armed forces and forged weapons. Even to [[Gondolin]] came word of the Union and [[Turgon]] the [[Hidden King]] secretly made his own preparations. Other Elves, like [[Orodreth]], refused to join because of the evils of [[Celegorm]] and [[Curufin]], while [[Thingol]] had sworn never to fight alongside the Feanorians; only a few representatives came from Doriath and Nargothrond. 

Maedhros' plans were to lead his army (with some assistance from the western army) to [[Anfauglith]] in order to draw out the armies of Morgoth, and then flank with the hidden forces of Fingon that would emerge from the [[Ered Wethrin]].

Initially, the forces managed to clean of evil creatures [[West Beleriand]] and [[Dorthonion]], and the final assault was planned for [[Midsummer]]. However, Morgoth had time to prepare his forces as Maedhros revealed himself too early, and then [[Uldor]], who was an agent of the Enemy, delayed Maedhros' forces by giving false reports of enemy presence. A small force of [[Orcs]] managed to provoke the western army prematurely, instigated by [[Gwindor]]. As a result, the armies of the Union were themselves outflanked in the ensuing battle, which, despite Turgon's timely and unexpected arrival, would prove disastrous, and would be known as the [[Nirnaeth Arnoediad]].<ref name="Fifth" />

{{notes}}
{{references}}
[[Category:Armies]]
[[Category:Organizations]]
[[de:Maedhros’ Bund]]