{{infobox character
| people=[[Gondorians|Gondorian]]
| name=Valacar
| image=Matěj Čadil - Valacar of Gondor.jpg
| caption="Valacar of Gondor" by [[:Category:Images by Matěj Čadil|Matěj Čadil]]
| pronun=
| othernames=
| titles=[[Kings of Gondor|King of Gondor]]
| position=
| location=[[Gondor]]
| affiliation=
| language=[[Westron]], language of the [[Northmen]]
| birth={{TA|1194}}
| birthlocation=
| rule={{TA|1366}} - {{TA|1432|n}} (66 years)
| death={{TA|1432}}
| deathlocation=
| age=238
| notablefor=
| house=[[House of Anárion]]
| parentage=[[Rómendacil II]]
| siblings=
| spouse=[[Vidumavi]]
| children=[[Eldacar (King of Gondor)|Eldacar]]
| gender=Male
| height=
| hair=
| eyes=
| clothing=
| weapons=
| steed=
}}'''Valacar''' ({{TA|1194}}<ref name=Elendil>{{PM|Elendil}}, The Southern Line of Gondor: the Anarioni, 20. Valakar</ref> – {{TA|1432|n}},<ref>{{App|South}}, ''Kings of Gondor'', Valacar</ref> aged 238 years) was the twentieth [[King of Gondor]].<ref>{{App|South}}, ''Kings of Gondor''</ref>

==History==
in {{TA|1250}} Valacar's father, [[Minalcar]], the regent of Gondor, who had taken the name Rómendacil after his victory over a large army of [[Easterlings]] sent Valacar as an ambassador to [[Vidugavia]], a prince of the [[Northmen]] who called himself [[King of Rhovanion]] whose realm was between [[Mirkwood]] and the [[River Running]] and who had helped Gondor in the war against the Easterlings. Minalcar charged Valacar to learn the language, manners and policies of the [[Northmen]]. Valacar learned to love the country and the the Northmen and married [[Vidumavi]], the daughter of Vidugavia. During this stay in Rhovanion his son Eldacar was born who also received the name Vinitharya in the language of the Northmen. After some years Valacar returned to Gondor. The high men of Gondor disapproved that the heir to the crown had married a woman of a lesser and alien race. Vidumavi was a beautiful and noble lady, but had a shorter life compared to the longer lifeexpectancy of the Dúnedain. Some Dúnedain feared that his descendants would also have a short life and fall from the majesty of the Kings of Men and did not want to accept Valacar as their lord. When Valacar grew old there was rebellion in the southern provinces.<ref name="Gondor">{{App|Gondor}}, entry for Minalcar (Rómendacil II)</ref>

==Etymology==
''Valacar'' is a [[Quenya]] name. It is a compound of ''[[Vala]]'' and the suffixal form ''-car'' of ''[[karma|carma]]'' "helm", also seen in [[Eldacar]] "Elf-helm".<ref>{{PE|17}}, p. 114 entry Q ''Eldacar; Valacar''</ref> Paul Strack suggests the name Valacar means "Vala helm".<ref>{{webcite|author=Paul Strack|articleurl=https://www.eldamo.org/content/words/word-4025193527.html|articlename=Q. ''Valacar'' m.|website=Eldamo|accessed=05 March 2022}}</ref>

== Genealogy ==
{{familytree/start}}
{{familytree | | | | | | | CAL | | |NAR=[[Narmacil I]]<br/><small>''{{TA|1049|n}} - {{TA|1294|n}}''</small>|CAL=[[Calmacil (King of Gondor)|Calmacil]]<br/><small>''{{TA|1058|n}} - {{TA|1304|n}}''</small>}}
{{familytree | | | | | |,|-|^|-|.| |}}
{{familytree | VID | | ROM | | CAL |VID=[[Vidugavia]]<br/><small>''unknown''</small>|ROM=[[Rómendacil II]]<br/><small>''{{TA|1126|n}} - {{TA|1366|n}}''</small>|CAL=[[Calimehtar (son of Calmacil)|Calimehtar]]<br/><small>''unknown''</small>}}
{{familytree | |!| | | |!| | | |:| |}}
{{familytree | VID |y| VAL | | |:| |VID=[[Vidumavi]]<br/><small>''d. {{TA|1332|n}}''</small>|VAL='''VALACAR'''<br/><small>''{{TA|1194|n}} - {{TA|1432|n}}''</small>}}
{{familytree | | | |!| | | | | |:| |}}
{{familytree | | | ELD | | | | CAS |ELD=[[Eldacar (King of Gondor)|Eldacar]]<br/><small>''{{TA|1255|n}} - {{TA|1490|n}}''</small>|CAS=[[Castamir]]<br/><small>''{{TA|1259|n}} - {{TA|1447|n}}''†</small>}}
{{familytree | |,|-|^|-|.| | | |!| |}}
{{familytree | ORN | | ALD | | SON |ORN=[[Ornendil]]<br/><small>''d. {{TA|1437|n}}''†</small>|ALD=[[Aldamir]]<br/><small>''{{TA|1330|n}} - {{TA|1540|n}}''†</small>|SON=''sons''<br/><small>''unknown''†</small>}}
{{familytree/end}}

==Other versions of the legendarium==
A late manuscript of what would later become the entry for Minalcar, Valacar and Eldacar in Appendix A in the second edition of The Lord of the Rings, also mentions that Romendakil gave his approval to the marriage, because he wanted to avoid angering the Northmen and earning the enmity of Vidugavia that a refusal of the marriage would have caused. It also mentions that Minalkcar called back Valakar to Gondor in {{TA|1240}} and that a household of noble men and women of the Northmen accompanied Valakar and his wife and children to Gondor. It is further mentioned that Valakar gave the name Eldakar to his son for public use in Gondor.<ref>{{PM|Ai}}, Note on the expansion of the tale of the Kin-strife in the Second Edition, typescript D of The Heirs of Elendil, 19. Romendakil II</ref>

{{references}}

{{seq-start}}
{{seq-head
| race=gondorian
| house=[[House of Anárion]]<small><br/>Cadet branch of [[House of Elros]]</small>
| born={{TA|1194}}
| died={{TA|1432}}
}}
{{seq
| prev=[[Rómendacil II]]
| list=20th [[Kings of Gondor|King of Gondor]]
| dates={{TA|1366}} - {{TA|1432|n}}
| next=[[Eldacar (King of Gondor)|Eldacar]]
}}
{{seq-end}}
{{southernline}}
[[Category:Gondorians]]
[[Category:House of Anárion]]
[[Category:Quenya names]]
[[Category:Rulers of Gondor]]
[[Category:Third Age characters]]
[[de:Valacar]]
[[fr:encyclo/personnages/hommes/3a/dunedain/gondoriens/valacar]]
[[fi:Valacar]]