{{infobox character
| people=[[Northmen|Northman]]
| name=Vidumavi
| image=Matěj Čadil - Valacar of Gondor.jpg
| caption="Valacar of Gondor" by [[:Category:Images by Matěj Čadil|Matěj Čadil]]
| pronun=
| othernames=''Galadwen'' ([[Sindarin|S]])
| titles=
| position=
| location=[[Rhovanion]]<br/>[[Gondor]]
| affiliation=
| language=
| birth=before {{TA|1255}}<ref group=note>The year of birth of Vidumavi is not known. Based on the year of birth of her son Eldacar in {{TA|1255}}, Vidumavi must have been born before {{TA|1255}} and must have been at an age where she was able to conceive children that year.</ref><ref name=Elendil>{{PM|Elendil}}, manuscript C with corrections and expansions, The Southern Line of Gondor: the Anarioni, 21(a). Eldakar. born 1255</ref>
| birthlocation=
| rule=
| death={{TA|1332}} (aged 77+)<ref group=note>According to typescript D of the Heirs of Elendil "she lived to a great age, as such was reckoned among her people". In one copy of the typescript the year of her death was {{TA|1332}} and in another copy {{TA|1344}}. Based on the year of birth of her son Eldacar in {{TA|1255}}, Vidumavi died either 77 or 89 years after that. Considering the known age of death of other women of the Edain or the Rohirrim, and the possible earliest age when she could be fertile, this article chooses the earlier year as more realistic, as the other would make her more than 100 years old.</ref>
| deathlocation=[[Gondor]]
| age=
| notablefor=
| house=
| parentage=[[Vidugavia]]
| siblings=
| spouse=[[Valacar]]
| children=[[Eldacar (King of Gondor)|Eldacar]], at least one other child<ref>{{PM|Ai}}, typescript D of The Heirs of Elendil written in 1965 "Valakar returned to Gondor with his wife and children" and "which she imparted to her children", pp. 259.</ref>
| gender=Female
| height=
| hair=
| eyes=
| clothing=
| weapons=
| steed=
}}
'''Vidumavi''', also known as '''Galadwen''',<ref name=PMA>{{PM|Ai}}, typescript D of The Heirs of Elendil, pp. 259</ref> was the daughter of [[Vidugavia]], the [[King of Rhovanion]].<ref name=Gondor>{{App|Gondor}}, entry for king Minalcar who took the name Rómendacil (II), p. 1046</ref>

== History ==
In {{TA|1248}} Vidugavia, who was the most powerful of the Northern princes and called himself King of Rhovanion, helped [[Minalcar]], the prince and [[Regent of Gondor]] in a war against the [[Easterlings]].<ref name=Gondor/>

Two years later, in {{TA|1250}}, Minalcar sent his son, prince [[Valacar]], to live for a while with Vidugavia as an ambassador to learn the language, manners and policies of the [[Northmen]]. Valacar loved the Northern lands and people and married Vidumavi, the daugther of Vidugavia, during his stay in Rhovanion.<ref name=Gondor/> In {{TA|1255}}<ref name=Elendil/> Vidumavi gave birth to a son, who was named ''Vinitharya'' in the language of his mother.<ref name=Gondor/>

In {{TA|1260}} Minalcar recalled Valacar back to Gondor to take part in the councils of the realm and the command of its armies. Vidumavi was brought by her husband to Gondor with her children and a household of noble men and women from Rhovanion. They were welcomed in Gondor and Vinitharya was given the name [[Eldacar (King of Gondor)|Eldacar]] for public use in [[Gondor]] and Vidumavi agreed to be called Galadwen, a translation of her name into [[Sindarin]].<ref name=PMA/>

Vidumavi learned the language and manners of Gondor well. Vidumavi was fair, noble and of high courage, which she passed on to her children.<ref name=PMA/> Although Vidumavi was short-lived compared to the longer lifespan of the [[Dúnedain]],<ref name=Gondor/> she died in {{TA|1332}} at a great age compared to the lifespan of her own people<ref name=PMA/> before Valacar became king.<ref>{{App|South}}, ''Kings of Gondor'', Rómendacil II died 1366, p. 1038</ref>

== Etymology ==
[[Christopher Tolkien]] suggests that ''Vidumavi'' is a Latinized spelling of the [[Gothic]] name ''Widumawi'', which means "wood-maiden".<ref>{{UT|8e}}, Note 6, p. 311</ref> [[Arden R. Smith]] proposes that the name is a combination of the Gothic elements ''*widus'' ("wood", "forest") and ''mawi'' ("maiden").<ref>[[Arden R. Smith]], Tolkienian Gothic, in [[Wayne G. Hammond]] & [[Christina Scull]], [[The Lord of the Rings 1954-2004]]: Scholarship in Honor of Richard E. Blackwelder, pp. 268-269</ref>

''Galadwen'' is a [[Sindarin]] name with the same meaning.<ref name=PMA/> Paul Strack suggests that it is a compound of ''[[galadh]]'' ("tree") and the suffixal form of ''[[-wen|gwend]]'' ("maiden").<ref>{{webcite|author=Paul Strack|articleurl=https://www.eldamo.org/content/words/word-336882159.html|articlename=S. ''Galadwen'' f.|dated=|website=eldamo.org|accessed=22 February 2022}}</ref>

== Genealogy ==
{{familytree/start}}
{{familytree | VID | | ROM |VID=[[Vidugavia]]<br/><small>''unknown''</small>|ROM=[[Rómendacil II]]<br/><small>''{{TA|1126|n}} - {{TA|1366|n}}''</small>}}
{{familytree | |!| | | |!| |}}
{{familytree | VID |y| VAL |VID='''VIDUMAVI'''<br/><small>''d. {{TA|1332|n}}''</small>|VAL=[[Valacar]]<br/><small>''{{TA|1194|n}} - {{TA|1432|n}}''</small>}}
{{familytree | | | |!| | | |}}
{{familytree | | | ELD | | |ELD=[[Eldacar (King of Gondor)|Eldacar]]<br/><small>''{{TA|1255|n}} - {{TA|1490|n}}''</small>}}
{{familytree | |,|-|^|-|.| |}}
{{familytree | ORN | | ALD |ORN=[[Ornendil]]<br/><small>''d. {{TA|1437|n}}''†</small>|ALD=[[Aldamir]]<br/><small>''{{TA|1330|n}} - {{TA|1540|n}}''†</small>}}
{{familytree/end}}

==External links==
* [https://www.silmarillionwritersguild.org/node/8042 Vidumavi of the Northmen (Silmarillion Writers' Guild]

{{references|n}}
[[Category:Gothic names]]
[[Category:Northmen]]
[[Category:Third Age characters]]
[[de:Vidumavi]]
[[fr:encyclo/personnages/hommes/3a/hommes du nord/vidumavi]]
[[fi:Vidumavi]]