{{infobox character
| people=[[Rohirrim|Rohir]]
| name=Walda
| image=
| caption=
| pronun=
| othernames=
| titles=[[King of Rohan]]
| position=
| location=[[Rohan]]
| affiliation=
| language=[[Rohanese]] and [[Westron]]
| birth={{TA|2780}}
| birthlocation=
| rule={{TA|2842}} - {{TA|2851|n}}
| death={{TA|2851}} (aged 71)
| deathlocation=near [[Dunharrow]]
| age=
| notablefor=
| house=[[House of Eorl]]
| parentage=[[Brytta|Brytta Léofa]]
| siblings=
| spouse=
| children=[[Folca]]
| gender=Male
| height=
| hair=
| eyes=
| clothing=
| weapons=
| steed=
}}
'''Walda''' ([[Third Age]] {{TA|2780|n}} – {{TA|2851|n}}, aged 71 years) was the twelfth [[King of Rohan]].<ref name=Walda>{{App|Mark}}, ''Second Line'', entry 2780-2851 12. ''Walda'', p. 1069</ref>

==History==
Walda was the son of [[Brytta|Brytta Léofa]] and was born in a time when his country was still plagued by [[Orcs]] who had invaded Rohan after the [[War of Dwarves and Orcs]].<ref name=Brytta>{{App|Mark}}, ''Second Line'', entry 2752-2842 11. ''Brytta'', p. 1068</ref>

He became king after the death of his father in {{TA|2842}}. At the time of his father's death it was believed Rohan had been freed of the Orcs. However, some Orcs remained, and in {{TA|2851|n}} after ruling just nine years he and all his companions were killed by Orcs when they rode from [[Dunharrow]] on mountain paths.<ref name=Walda/>

Walda was buried in the third mound on the east-side of the Barrow-field<ref>{{RK|Partings}}, p. 977</ref> on the left side of the road that approached Edoras<ref>{{TT|King}}, p. 507</ref> from the north-west.<ref>{{RK|Map}}</ref> He was succeeded and avenged by his son [[Folca]] who cleared Rohan of all Orcs.<ref name=Folca>{{App|Mark}}, ''Second Line'', entry 2804-64 13. ''Folca'', p. 1069</ref>

==Etymology==
''Walda'' is derived from the [[Old English]] name ''wealda'', which means "ruler".<ref>{{HM|RC}}, p. 644</ref>

==Genealogy==
{{familytree/start}}
{{familytree | FRE |FRE=[[Fréaláf|Fréaláf Hildeson]]<br/><small>''{{TA|2726|n}} - {{TA|2798|n}}''</small>}}
{{familytree | |!| |}}
{{familytree | BRY |BRY=[[Brytta|Brytta Léofa]]<br/><small>''{{TA|2752|n}} - {{TA|2842|n}}''</small>}}
{{familytree | |!| |}}
{{familytree | WAL |WAL='''WALDA'''<br/><small>''{{TA|2780|n}} - {{TA|2851|n}}''†</small>}}
{{familytree | |!| |}}
{{familytree | FOL |FOL=[[Folca]]<br/><small>''{{TA|2804|n}} - {{TA|2864|n}}''†</small>}}
{{familytree | |!| |}}
{{familytree | FOL |FOL=[[Folcwine]]<br/><small>''{{TA|2830|n}} - {{TA|2903|n}}''</small>}}
{{familytree/end}}

==Other versions of the legendarium==
His death date is recorded as {{TA|2851}}<ref name=Walda/> in the list of the Kings of the Mark in [[Appendix A]], but as as {{TA|2861|n}} in The Tale of Years of the Third Age in [[Appendix B]].<ref>{{App|TA}}, entry for the year 2800-64 "(2861)", p. 1088</ref> The death date {{TA|2851}} is probably correct, because the entry for king Walda in the list of Kings of the Mark mentions that he "was king only nine years"<ref name=Walda/> and the entry for his father mentions that his father died in {{TA|2842}}.<ref name=Brytta/>

There was no note about the events during the life of Walda in the list of Kings of the Mark in the first edition of ''[[The Lord of the Rings]]''.<ref>{{PM|Aiii}}, Notes, note 5</ref>

{{references}}
{{seq-start}}
{{seq-head
| race=rohirrim
| house=House of Eorl
| born={{TA|2780}}
| died={{TA|2851}}
}}
{{seq
| prev=[[Brytta]]
| list=12th [[King of Rohan]]
| dates={{TA|2842}} – {{TA|2851|n}}
| next=[[Folca]]
}}
{{seq-end}}
{{rohankings}}
[[Category:Kings of Rohan]]
[[Category:Old English names]]
[[Category:Rohirrim]]
[[Category:Third Age characters]]

[[de:Walda]]
[[fi:Walda]]
[[fr:encyclo/personnages/hommes/3a/hommes du nord/rohirrim/walda]]