{{anglosaxon infobox
| name=Íring
| image=
| caption=
| people=[[wikipedia:Irish people|Irishman]]
| pronun=
| othernames=
| titles=
| position=
| location=[[Íwerin]]<br />[[wikipedia:England|England]]
| affiliation=
| language=
| birth=
| birthlocation=
| rule=
| death=
| deathlocation=
| age=
| notablefor=
| house=
| parentage=[[Ír]]
| siblings=
| spouse=
| children=
| gender=Male
| height=
| hair=
| eyes=
| clothing=
| weapons=
| steed=
}}
'''Íring''' was the son of King [[Ír]] of [[Íwerin]], according to the early version of the [[legendarium]] associated with ''[[The Book of Lost Tales]]''.<ref name=Iri>{{PE|15}}, "[[Early Runic Documents]]", ''ER1d: Fourth page'', p. 96</ref>

== History ==
Íring was commissioned by an [[wikipedia:Anglo-Saxons|Anglo-Saxon]] King [[Watol]] to build a road through his lands, which he had done in the span of seven years. However, the sons of Watol, the [[Wætlingas]], were angered by his arrogance, and therefore wagered that they could build an even better road in only three years.

Therefore, Íring asked his father Ír for help, and, since Ír was allied with the [[Orcs]] of Íwerin, he sent "all kinds of secret evils" in order to stop the progress of the Wætlingas.

Finally however, when three years had passed, Íring, "despairing of his wager", killed the sons of Watol.

Presumably trying to redress the situation, Íring was allowed by the god [[wikipedia:Odin|Wóden]] (i.e. [[Manweg]])<ref group=note>''Manweg'' is a [[Gnomish]] form of ''Manwë''.</ref> to build a road out of star-dust "across the heavens" running parallel to Íringesweg, the road that he had built.

That [[wikipedia:Milky Way|heavenly road]] later became known as the ''[[wikipedia:Watling Street|Watling Street]]'', in the honour of the Wætlingas, but it was also known as ''Íringesweg'' as well, so that Íring's "name shall not fade".<ref name=Iri/>

== Genealogy ==
{{familytree/start}}
{{familytree | IRE |IRE=[[Ír]]}}
{{familytree | |!| |}}
{{familytree | IRI |IRI='''ÍRING'''}}
{{familytree/end}}

== Inspiration ==
The story of Íring building a road in the heavens, afterwards named after the Wætlingas ''Wæclinga-strǽt'' (that is, the Watling Street), was an attempt by [[Tolkien]] to provide an answer, through his own [[legendarium|mythology]], to an etymological issue concerning the Watling Street.

According to the English chronicler [[wikipedia:Florence of Worcester|Florence of Worcester]], the sons of Watol built the Watling Street in the year [[wikipedia:1013|1013 AD]]; there, Florence of Worcester also said that the name ''Watling Street'' was afterwards applied to the Milky Way.

Tolkien, however, argued that the ''original'' meaning of the [[Old English]] ''Wæclinga-strǽt'' (Watling Street) referred to the Milky Way, and it was only following the [[wikipedia:Anglo-Saxon settlement of Britain|Anglo-Saxon invasion]] of [[wikipedia:Great Britain|Britain]] that the term ''Wæclinga-strǽt'' was applied to the old [[wikipedia:Roman Empire|Roman]] road running from [[wikipedia:Dover|Dover]] to [[wikipedia:Chester|Chester]].

The name ''Íringesweg'' (or ''Iringes weg'') was another Old English name for the Milky Way which Tolkien wanted to incorporate into his mythology at this point.<ref>{{PE|15}}, "[[Early Runic Documents]]", ''Commentary on ER1'', p. 100</ref>

{{references|notes}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:Iring}}
[[Category:Characters in The Book of Lost Tales]]
[[Category:Men]]
[[Category:Old English names]]